kindergarten in eastern China, state media reported on Thursday, the fourth such stabbing case in recent weeks. Xu
Yuyuan, 47, an unemployed local man, broke into a classroom in Taixing city of eastern Jiangsu province on Thursday
morning, attacking the children with a 20 cm long knife, the official Xinhua news agency said. The injured children were
all about four years old, and five are in critical condition, it added. Xu has been jobless since he was fired from a local
insurance company in 2001, and then took part in pyramid selling schemes, Xinhua added. The attack is the fourth
reported school stabbing in China in recent weeks, and the rash of violence has prompted public calls for more measures
to protect students in a country where many couples only have one child. A man stabbed 16 students and a teacher at a
primary school in southern China on Wednesday, the same day that a former doctor was executed for stabbing to death
eight school children last month. ""More concrete measures should be taken to make school the safest place,"" a
commentary in today's Beijing News said, calling for more serve punishment for these killers. Some Chinese people have
taken to the Internet to discuss the root causes of the increasing number of school tragedies"
4758,"B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Please print the message below from Embassy Beijing which gives some further background
===
(From Embassy Beijing)
I was the notetaker AMB Huntsman asked me.
to give you a readout
AmEmbassy Beijing
04/28/2035"
4759,We traded calls but I haven't heard back.
4760,"8:00 am PHONE CALL w/CHINESE STATE COUNCILOR DAI BINGGUO
Private Residence
9:25 am DEPART Private Residence *En route Washington National Cathedral
9:30 am ARRIVE Washington National Cathedral
10:00 am FUNERAL SERVICE FOR DR DOROTHY HEIGHT
12:00 pm (t) Washington National Cathedral, 3101 Wisconsin Avenue, NW
12:05 pm (t) DEPART National Cathedral *En route State Department
12:15 pm (t) ARRIVE State Department
12:15 pm OFFICE TIME
1:15 pm Secretary's Office
1:15 pm MEETING w/JACK LEW AND RAJ SHAH
1:30 pm Secretary's Office
1:30 pm BILATERAL w/POLISH FM RADOSLAW SIKORSKI
2:00 pm Secretary's Conference Room *Official photo in East Hall preceding.
2:00 pm PRESS PRE-BRIEF
2:05 pm Secretary's Office
2:05 pm JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/POLISH FM SIKORSKI
2:20 pm Treaty Room
2:30 pm OFFICE TIME
3:10 pm Secretary's Office
3:10pm MEETING w/MILDRED OTERO
3:20pm Secretary's Office
3:25 pm DEPART State Department *En route White House
3:30 pm ARRIVE White House
3:30 pm SMALL GROUP MEETING
4:15 pm White House Situation Room
4:30 pm WEEKLY MEETING w/POTUS
5:00 pm Oval Office
5:05 pm DEPART White House *En route State Department
5:10 pm ARRIVE State Department
5:30 pm HOST ANNUAL RECEPTION FOR THE DONORS TO THE
7:00 pm DIPLOMATIC RECEPTION ROOMS Adams/Franklin Rooms, 8th Floor
7:05 pm DEPART State Department *En route Grand Hyatt Hotel
7:15 pm ARRIVE Grand Hyatt Hotel
7:20 pm REMARKS AT THE AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE GALA
7:40 pm ANNUAL DINNER Grand Hyatt Hotel, 1300 H Street, NW
7:40 pm DEPART Grand Hyatt Hotel *En route Private Residence
7:55 pm ARRIVE Private Residence ###"
4761,Pretty good stuff.
4762,Huma said you were asking about the goals and purposes of the NAM lunch Monday.
4763,Hrc - we are going to extend invites tomorrow morning if ok with you?
4764,Lauren - can u print for hrc?
4765,Yep
4766,"7:45 am PHONE CALL w/PHILIPPE *Private Residence
8:30 am DEPART Private Residence *En route NBC Studio
8:50 am ARRIVE NBC Studio
9:00 am TAPED INTERVIEW w/NBC MEET THE PRESS' DAVID GREGORY
9:20 am NBC Studio
9:25 am DEPART NBC Studio *En route State Department
9:40 am ARRIVE State Department
9:55 am RECEPTION TO CELEBRATE THE OPENING OF THE USA
10:20 am PAVILLION AT THE 2010 SHANGHAI WORLD EXPO
Benjamin Franklin Room, 8th Floor
10:30 am BILATERAL w/KUWAITI DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/FOREIGN
11:00 am MINISTER DR MOHAMMAD SABAH AL-SALEM AL SABAFI
Secretary's Conference Room *Official photo in East Hall preceding.
11:00 am PRESS PRE-BRIEF
11:05 am Secretary's Office
11:05 am JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/QATARI PRIME MINISTER AND
11:20 am FM DR MOHAMMAD al-SARAH al-SALEM AL SARAH Treaty Room
11:30 am OFFICE TIME
12:45 pm Secretary's Office
12:45 pm PRE-BRIEF MEETING
1:15 pm Secretary's Office
1:15 pm BILATERAL w/SPAMSH FM MIGUEL ANGEL MORATINOS
1:45 pm Secretary's Conference Room *Camera Spray in Treaty Room preceding.
2:00 pm ONE-ON-ONE MEETING w/AFGHAN PRESIDENTIAL ADVISOR
2:30 pm ASHRAF GRAM Secretary's Office
2:50 pm VIDEOS (4)
3:05 pm George Marshall Room, 76 Floor
3:10 pm 152ND FOREIGN SERVICE OFFICER ORIENTATION CLASS
3:25 pm SWEARING-IN CEREMONY Dean Acheson Auditorium, First Floor
3:30 pm OFFICE TIME
4:15 pm Secretary's Office
4:20 pm DEPART State Department *En route Washington National Airport
4:40 pm ARRIVE Washington National Airport
5:00 pm DEPART Washington National Airport via US Airways Shuttle #2180
En route New York, NY
6:25 pm ARRIVE LaGuardia Airport
6:35 pm DEPART LaGuardia Airport *En route Private Residence ##4"
4767,Would be happy to
4768,"Valmoro, Lona J <ValmoroU©state.gov>
Friday, April 30, 2010 8:59 AM
Jiloty, Lauren C; H
Re: Schedule request
Yes I will get the number from Lauren and call this morning.
Lona Valmoro
S • ecial Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
4769,"sbwhoeop
Wednesday, March 24, 2010 11:11 PM
h: FYI, Iran document Gary Sick sent me. Sid
From Gary Sick
Mojtaba Samareh Hashemi is a senior adviser to President Ahmadinejad and a devoted proponent of the Divine Right of
Kings doctrine of ultra-conservative ayatollah Mesbah-Yazdi. Many regard him as an eminence grise of the Iranian regime
and an important bridge between the Revolutionary Guards, the fanatic-fringe ayatollahs, and the presidency. So his
words are worth listening to as clues to what is happening inside the closed circles of the Iranian leadership.
Today he was quoted by the Fars news agency (in Persian) on the troublesome issue of U.S.-Iran relations. Although the
statement was translated into English, it needs more than a word-for-word translation in order to be understood. So I have
added my own interpretation of what Mojtaba really meant to say.
""Obama not only did not manage to realize his slogan [of change], but has pursued the dark policies of Bush all over the
world ever more energetically...""
[real meaning: Oh, how we miss George Bush! He was such an easy target. With him we were winning everywhere and
America's credibility was falling to the point of disappearance even among its friends.]
""The Bush presidency is one of the darkest eras of the United States and the greatest hatred emerged internationally
towards the United States...""
[Why can't Obama be more like Bush? In the good old days we didn't have to keep answering questions about why we
would not accept an outstretched hand of friendship. It was all so much easier then.]
""Today we see that the United States rather than moving its military forces out of Iraq and Afghanistan has increased their
number which has led to mass murder of the people and increased impoverishment in these countries. Obama had said
that he wanted to oppose violation of human rights and wanted to close Guantanamo and secret prisons in Europe. Did
this happen? Of course not...""
[The United States has announced its withdrawal from Iraq and actually seems to be on schedule; in the meantime, our
favorite parties and politicians in Iraq have not done all that well in the Iraqi elections despite our support. The Shi'i
religious leaders in Najaf openly dismiss the idea of an Islamic Republic and are increasingly competing with us, instead
of following our lead. In Afghanistan, the Americans seem to be serious about announcing a date certain for withdrawal,
and they even seem to be edging up to a Karzai reconciliation strategy with the Taliban. How can we attack them with a
straight face when they behave this way!]
""There has also not been any correction of the dark policy of Bush towards Iran's nuclear program or [the United State's]
opposition towards the Iranian nation...""
[Their willingness to meet with us and that dastardly offer of a uranium swap were hugely embarrassing. Now every time
we sit down with a foreign leader we have to listen to tiresome suggestions that we should reconsider our position on the
uranium swap — even from the Russians and Chinese. You can't trust anyone these days!]
""We do not want anything from the United States. The Iranian nation demands its rights to be recognized and
respected...""
[All we want from the Americans is the return of George Bush! Even John McCain would be an improvement. I wonder if
Sarah Palin has any chance? We'll keep our fingers crossed.]
""The Islamic Republic has not become isolated, rather, it is expanding [its foreign relations] ever more and is finding new
friends... if they have claims, they must show it in their actions so the Iranian nation gradually trusts them...""
[We have never been so alone since the earliest years of the revolution. Even dictators and police states are privately
expressing sympathy to us for the way our crackdown on the Green Movement attracted sympathetic attention all over the
world. And it's all the fault of that *&!*Obama and the %$#! internet. The shah never had all these problems. Ah, for the
good old days...]"
4770,"RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6
These Review Conferences have been held every five years for the
last four decades.
We know there are some countries who will choose not to be
constructive."
4771,Lona has logged a message at her office
4773,Yes we figured that?
4774,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 30, 2010 11:16 AM
H
remind me to discuss"
4776,"News to me
They want you to call the new ukrainian foreign minister but that's all I know."
4777,"The plan is to have a large screen off to your side so that it won't get in the way of a tight shot. We've worked with
National Geographic on the photos -- some of which are quite stunning -- and they'll pace the presentation slowly with
long transitions so it's not distracting. I've folded the images into the text I'm sending you, but you'll have a
teleprompter on stage tomorrow."
4778,"Attached is a memo from MeJanne, Jen, and Rachel on maternal health and abortion."
4779,fyi
4780,Any preference to front or back end? He is set for 2:45pm.
4781,yes
4782,"PIR <preines■
Friday, April 30, 2010 6:14 PM
H
Re: Oil spill
I'm not
For a few reasons
First, calmness is not such a bad thing in these moments. Calm is not cavalier, which you weren't
Second, you're not the EPA administrator or Interior Secretary - nobody will see you as a front line cabinet officer on this
Third, if this is still out of control on Sunday, the administration has bigger problems
So I'm really not worried.
Here it is again which might allay your concerns
SECRETARY CLINTON: Well, David, I think that the President has ordered the departments that deal with this —
Homeland Security, Interior, Environmental Protection, Defense — to all immediately not only do everything possible to
mitigate the effects of this spill, but to try to come up with recommendations going forward. The first order of business,
however, is to try to get this spill under control, which has been, as you know, very difficult, and to prevent further
damage to the coastline along Louisiana to the fishing waters, to the wildlife. I think it does raise questions which the
President has said have to be answered. He put forth a very comprehensive approach that included the potential of
drilling off of our own shores. That is a national security concern because we have to do better to lessen our
dependence on foreign oil. But it has to be done safely. It can't be done at the risk of having to spend billions of dollars
cleaning up these spills. So as with so much in these difficult areas, it's going to require a balancing act."
4783,"B5
B5
There is a proposed letter that should be in your weekend reading materials. Adding Huma to see if she's seen it.,
I will make sure it gets to you now.
B5"
4784,"sbwhoeop
Thursday, March 25, 2010 10:16 AM
H: Haaretz chief columnist on Bibi's visit. Sid
htto://www. haaretz.com/hasers/spagesil 158992. html
Aluf Benn / Netanyahu leaves U.S. disgraced, isolated and weaker
By Ake Berm
Details emerging from Benjamin Netanyahu's visit to Washington remain incomplete, but the conclusion may nonetheless
be drawn that the prime minister erred in choosing to fly to the United States this week. The visit - touted as a fence-
mending effort, a bid to strengthen the tenuous ties between Netanyahu and U.S. President Barack Obama - only
highlighted the deep rift between the American and Israeli administrations.
The prime minister leaves America disgraced, isolated, and altogether weaker than when he came.
Instead of setting the diplomatic agenda, Netanyahu surrendered control over it. Instead of leaving the Palestinian issue
aside and focusing on Iran, as he would like, Netanyahu now finds himself fighting for the legitimacy of Israeli control over
East Jerusalem.
Advertisement
The most sensitive and insoluble core issues - those which when raised a decade ago led to the dissolution of
the peace process and explosion of the second intifada - are now being served as a mere appetizer.
At the start of his visit, Netanyahu was tempted to bask in the warm welcome he received at the AIPAC conference, at
which he gave his emotional address on Jerusalem.
Taking a page from Menachem Begin, he spoke not on behalf of the State of Israel, but in the name of the Jewish people
itself and its millennia of history.
His speech was not radical rightist rhetoric. Reading between the lines, one could spot a certain willingness to relinquish
West Bank settlements as long as Israel maintains a security buffer in the Jordan Valley.
But at the White House, the prime minister's speech to thousands of pro-Israel activists and hundreds of cheering
congressmen looked like an obvious attempt to raise political capital against the American president.
Knowing Netanyahu would be reenergized by his speech at the lobby, Obama and his staff set him a honey trap. Over the
weekend they sought to quell the row that flared up during U.S. Vice President Joe Biden's trip here two weeks ago, and
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton described Netanyahu's response to the ultimatums Washington presented to him
as ""useful.""
Special envoy George Mitchell made a televised visit to the prime minister's bureau Sunday to invite Netanyahu to the
White House. Washington, it seemed, was trying to make nice.
Far from it. Just when Netanyahu thought he had resolved the crisis by apologizing to Biden, Clinton called him up for a
dressing down.
This time as well, Netanyahu almost believed the crisis had passed, that he had survived by offering partial. noncommittal
answers to the Americans' questions. Shortly before meeting with Obama, Netanyahu even warned the Palestinians that
should they continue to demand a freeze on construction, he would postpone peace talks by a year.
His arrogant tone underscored the fact that Netanyahu believed that on the strength of his AIPAC speech, he could call
the next few steps of the diplomatic dance.
But then calamity struck. At their White House meeting, Obama made clear to his guest that the letter Netanyahu had
sent was insufficient and returned it for further corrections. Instead of a reception as a guest of honor, Netanyahu was
treated as a problem child, an army private ordered to do laps around the base for slipping up at roll call.
The revolution in the Americans' behavior is clear to all. On Sunday morning Obama was still anxiously looking ahead to
the House of Representatives vote on health care - the last thing he wanted was a last-minute disagreement with
congressmen over ties with Israel.
The moment the bill was passed, however, a victorious Obama was free to deal with his unruly guest.
The Americans made every effort to downplay the visit. As during his last visit in November, Netanyahu was invited to the
White House at a late hour, without media coverage or a press conference. If that were not enough, the White House
spokesman challenged Netanyahu's observation at AIPAC that ""Jerusalem is not a settlement.""
The Americans didn't even wait for him to leave Washington to make their disagreement known. It was not the behavior
Washington shows an ally, but the kind it shows an annoyance.
The approval of construction at the Shepherd Hotel in Sheikh Jarrah, announced before his meeting with Obama, again
caught Netanyahu unawares. Apparently the special panel appointed after the Ramat Shlomo debacle to prevent such
surprises failed its first test.
Netanyahu is having his most difficult week since returning to office, beginning with the unfortunate decision to relocate
the planned emergency room at Ashkelon's Barzilai Medical Center and lasting through his humiliating jaunt through
Washington.
Returning to Israel today, Netanyahu will need to work hard to rehabilitate his image, knowing full well that Obama will not
relent, but instead demand that he stop zigzagging and decide, once and for all, whether he stands with America or with
the settlers."
4785,"Of course.
Lona Valmoro
S ecial Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct) B6"
4786,Well most of the weekend planes are the little planes. Calling mario now to see..
4787,"Mario will know for sure but the only larger plane from the website seems to be the 10am. There is an 8am, 10am,
12pm, 2pm and 4pm tomorrow.
Lona Valmoro
t to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
4788,Ok
4789,"Haven't heard back from him
That's very possible. Could be a dc plane that need to ends up in ny for monday. III confirn."
4790,"I have attached a copy of the status report for the Pakistan Communications Plan which was approved last September.
You will note that we have made progress on many fronts. The Post has significantly increased its engagement with the
media and responds immediately to rumors and inaccurate stories. There has also been a significant increase in the
number of exchange participants. We are continuing to experience difficulty in filling critical positions and I am working
with Nancy Powell to address this issue.
Please let me know if you have any questions or comments.
JM"
4791,"I've sent the file to Ops. They'll fax over a black and white version momentarily, and send a color copy via courier."
4792,He is available until about 645 tonight. After that he catches a flight to london. I will add to your grid.
4793,"High Representative and 3 State Secretaries)
Importance: High
Haiti Donor Conference Update.
See below.
We have calls for you to call Qatar and UAE for funds (also on your call sheet was Saudis and Kuwait — have not seen
them register yet nor have they told our embassies yet).
Also — am going to head to Haiti for day on the CoDEL and sit with GOH on the development authority — just had long
convo with WJC.
cdm"
4795,"B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B5
Bill Luers sent me this report yesterday
07/30/2015 — Class: CONFIDENTIAL —
Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on:
03/24/2035"
4796,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, March 21, 2010 4:30 PM
RE: letter"
4797,FYI.
4798,"You should have Bob's memo on China currency, which he worked through with Bill. See below his further
elaboration:"
4799,Okay -- working on that.
4801,I believe so.
4802,Fyi
4803,"Is ready to come pick up the speech when you have it done. Just shoot him and email. I think it's really close. It's
gone out to the team again for any serious flags or omissions, but they've been warned you're line editing."
4804,"Also, you'll get Bibi points tonight, fresh from the road."
4805,Will do.
4806,Yep
4807,FYI
4808,"checked in with carlos and he says it would be useful, but not critical for you to call espinosa will have points for you
tomorrow in case you want to do"
4809,"2010 12:12 AM
sbwhoeop
Monday, Marc 2
I just want to drop you a note congratulating you on the vote tonight on health care, that whatever its imperfections the
establishment of the principle is a vindication. You might take a moment of personal privilege tomorrow to express
gratitude to Nancy Pelosi, the House, and the President for finally achieving the work of years. Sid"
4810,See below. How would you like to proceed? B5
4811,fyi
4813,"Thank you for your message. I am currently traveling on official business and can be reached on my Blackberry.
If you need assistance with a scheduling matter please reach out to my Scheduler, Eric Woodard, at 202-647-1522.
For all other issues needing immediate attention please contact my Chief-of-Staff, Simon Limage, at 202-647-1749."
4814,"Jerry, as you may recall, was Guiliani's homeland security guy in NYC and became B6
one of the world's experts. He also worked for Clinton Admn and helped with disaster relief (including earthquakes)
around the world. He called me today with some suggestions (some of which may be moot), so I asked him to put them
into a memo. Here it is, for what it's worth:
I think the fundamental issue is that no one seems to be in charge and no
one person has been tasked with trying to pull all of the pieces together
into a short term and long term plan. Obviously in the short term, search
and rescue and food and water are the main priorities. There seems to be
little communication between the various areas where people have congregated
and a central command post where agencies can call or radio for additional
supplies including food, water and medical.
I don't recommend DoD be put in charge of this. They rarely have the kind of
touch that brings together all the necessary agencies under one roof. I
would set up a central command that has representatives from all federal
agencies in one place. There is no reason things should be this
disorganized. I would break the island into grids and assign one person to
be the coordinator for each of the grids. That person will be responsible
for all activities within their grid and will report activities to the
island on-scene coordinator. We should get a radio company like Motorola to
set up temporary towers and give the State Department several hundred radios
so everyone involved in the response is able to communicate with the command
post and with each other.
I think one of the most important roles for DoD is to provide security for
the rescue teams and medical teams. They also should be responsible for the
operation of the airport, for off loading planes and for scheduling all
incoming flights so there is no lost time waiting for planes to land. I also
think DoD should be responsible for airlifting supplies that are requested
by each one of the grid coordinators. Additionally, the helicopters should
be used to move critical patients to the hospital ship on the way and to the
aircraft carrier currently on station. At least once a day, the coordinator
assigned by the President and the Secretary of State should be responsible
for getting situation reports from all agencies on site, particularly
regarding food and water, security, medical and search and rescue.
The lack of command and control is allowing the situation to become more
chaotic rather than more coordinated. I believe that if the Secretary were
to talk to the other nations involved through the UN, they would be
supportive of better coordination.
Bottom line is that there is no order to the operation and you need strong
people in there who can speak on behalf of the President and the Secretary
and get things under control quickly.
I hope this is helpful. If you or the Secretary have any questions please
feel free to call me on my cell We leave for Tokyo at 7:15 am
tomorrow and transfer to a United flight due back in DC at 2:30 pm tomorrow.
Please give the Secretary my best regards. I hope to see you soon.
B6"
4815,"FYI below on French statement on Haiti and U.S. support:
Paris, January 19, 2010
COMMUNIQUE
During their telephone conversation last week, the President of the Republic and President Obama expressed the
resolute commitment of our two countries in Haiti, and decided to combine their efforts in order to deal with the urgent
humanitarian situation and to respond, in the future, to the enormous reconstruction requirements.
The French authorities have, since then, been entirely satisfied with the cooperation between our two countries and,
beyond that, the continuous coordination between the Crises Centers of the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs
and the U.S. Department of State. They want to pay tribute to the United States' extraordinary mobilization efforts in
support of Haiti and the vital role it is playing on the ground."
4816,"Will do.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State"
4817,FYI
4818,fyi
4819,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov>
Thursday, March 25, 2010 11:17 PM
H
Mills, Cheryl D
RCH"
4821,agree
4822,"Per the earlier email
cdm"
4823,Will ask.
4824,"Absolutely. That's what you have a think tank for! On a related note, while it may not be useful for Pakistan, I think we
shd find ways to work qddr briefings/discussions into our strategic dialogues w/ india and china, to talk about how we
are rethinking both diplomacy and development -- maybe also w/ South Africa. AM"
4825,"Did cheryl pass this message from carlos pascual to you? Wanted to make sure u saw
Madam Secretary -
One of our Mexican staff and the husbands of two Mexican employees were killed last night in Juarez.
In one case a Mexican employee and her husband were leaving a party hosted by another Mexican employee. They were
in separate vehicles. He was stopped by a hit squad and killed before her.
In a second case a Mexican employee and her husband were killed leaving the same party. Their 3 month-old baby was
left alive in the back seat.
We have activated all investigative and intelligence channels to learn all we can. The head of Mexico's intelligence
service called to express President Calderon's condolences and to offer any support we need. Patricia Espinosa is aware.
She may call you. We will let you know if there are any leads on why this tragedy occurred.
Carlos Pascual"
4826,Will do.
4827,Yes. Any specific window?
4828,Ok calling you with carlos after u r done with rch.
4829,Yes. I will be finished going through it this morning before your meeting. Happy to discuss/report when you come in.
4830,"7:30 am PHONE CALL w/LEBANESE PRIME MINISTER SAAD HARIRI
Private Residence
8:45 am DEPART Private Residence *En route White House
8:55 am ARRIVE White House
9:00 am WEEKLY MEETING w/POTUS
9:30 am Oval Office
9:35 am DEPART White House *En route State Department
9:40 am ARRIVE State Department
9:45 am OFFICE TIME
10:15 am Secretary's Office
10:20 am DEPART State Department *En route White House
10:25 am ARRIVE White House
10:30 am POTUS STATEMENT ON START TREATY AGREEMENT
11:15 am (t) Oval Office/White House Briefmg Room
11:20 am (t) DEPART White House *En route State Department
11:25 am ARRIVE State Department
11:30 am MEETING w/SE SCOTT GRATION
12:00 pm Secretary's Office
12:00 pm BILATERAL w/CYPRIOT FM MARKOS ICYPRIANOU
12:30 pm Secretary's Conference Room *Camera spray in Treary Room preceding.
12:00 pm OFFICE TIME
1:00 pm Secretary's Office
1:00 pm PHOTOS
1:10 pm Secretary's Office
1:15 pm INTERVIEW w/NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC
2:00 pm Monroe Room, gth Floor
2:00 pm DROP BY w/KEN MILLER
2:20 pm Secretary's Office
2:20 pm DROP-BY w/LISSA
2:40 pm Secretary's Office
2:45 pm REMARKS TO STATE DEPARTMENT SPRING INTERNS,
3:15 pm STAY-IN-SCHOOL AND CO-OP STUDENTS, CIVIL SERVICE
CAREER ENTRY PROFESSIONALS, AND PRESIDENTIAL
MANAGEMENT FELLOWS L.oy Henderson Conference Room
3:30 pm CONFERENCE CALL w/SENATORS MAX BAUCUS AND JON TESTER
3:45 pm Secretary's Office
3:45 pm OFFICE TIME
5:15 pm Secretary's Office
5:20 pm DEPART State Department *En route Washington National Airport
5:25 pm PHONE INTERVIEW w/JESSLE LICHTENSTEIN, NYT MAGAZINE
5:35 pm En route Washington National Airport
5:40 pm ARRIVE Washington National Airport
6:00 pm DEPART Washington National Airport via US Airways Shuttle #2182
En route New York. NY
7:24 pm ARRIVE New York, New York-LaGuardia Airport
7:30 pm DEPART New York-LaGuardia Airport
En route Private Residence
8:20 pm ARRIVE Private Residence"
4831,"Has a call into to you. It's on your grid. His staff would not provide a subject matter. Rich is aware of this call.
5-2265 w Asst: Marvene
###"
4832,"Dennis, what is dara's last name?"
4833,"FYI, early read out of Pakistan media reaction to strategic dialogue. Not bad overall at this point.
Pakistan Media:
Coverage of the final round of the U.S.-Pak Strategic Dialogue dominated the front pages of all newspapers and
hourly bulletins of TV networks on Friday morning. Media highlighted reports that the U.S. and Pakistan
sought ""wide-ranging, long term and substantive partnership,"" and ""established a policy steering group for
further talks on strategic issues."" The signing of a letter of intent between the U.S. and Pakistan to help
reconstruction of priority roads in Malakand division also received prominent display. Secretary of Defense
Gates' meeting with his Pakistani counterpart, and his comments that the ""U.S. wants to increase the military
funding of Pakistan"" received coverage. Pak Army Chief General Kayani's remarks that the ""military is willing
to forgo its requests for hardware to ensure that Pakistan's energy and economic needs are met"" were also
reported. Reports that GOP and the opposition are not on same page regarding talks with the U.S. received
front-page display. The civilian nuclear deal issue made news as ""The News,"" reported that the ""FO seeks to
hide unease over nuclear snub"" and ""The Nation,"" reported on front-page that ""U.S. affirms durable partnership
but no civilian N-deal."" However Foreign Office spokesman's remarks, that the ""government is optimistic about
a positive outcome"" was also reported. Terming the U.S. commitment of $125 million for the power sector, as
""crucial,"" ""The News,"" noted in its editorial that ""it needs to be translated into action urgently."" Its sister mass-
circulated Urdu daily, ""Jang,"" however noted with a word of caution, that ""we think that the present U.S.
overtures to woo Pakistan are not completely altruistic. It remains to be seen what Washington wants from
Islamabad."" A prominent columnist, Ayesha Siddiqa noted in ""Dawn,"" that ""the U.S. might have realized that it
will have to listen to Pakistan and feel concerned about its inherent insecurity vis-a-vis India's role in
Afghanistan."""
4834,"pvervee
Sunday, March 14, 2010 12:29 PM
H
Re: How's the weekend gone?
On my way home. The conference was a big success. I met with Cherie Blair on the gender gap in cell phones -
technology that may be even be more tramsformative than microcredit. Phil was with GSMA for the release of their
study so we're going to figure out how we van get industry on board, etc. Cherie was involved in the GSMA study as well.
We'll both be at CGI retreat later this week where we'll raise it as well. She sends her love.
The conference referenced you over and over. Dr Mukwege personally thanked you for your leadership. Some ofthe
congolese women parliamentarians want to see if they can raise theirvoices to some good end the way the Liberians did.
We will see what we can do to help them.
DVF had an incredible awards ceremony last night. Our Haitian activist got one of the 50K prizes. DVF went on and on
about how your leadership was really responsible for the evening and what it represented.The awardees all mentioned
you. I talked to last night. I think we can get. him to fund college scolarships for afghan women.
Another awardee was one of our afghan women who's bldg schools.
I can't thank you enuf for Friday. I thought your legacy was manifested in every way.
BTW, Paul Charron was there last night and sends his best. He's such a good guy.
I'm heading home exhausted but gratified by what we've been able to do."
4835,Ok
4836,"-Does this work for you?
Statement by the Secretary
Murders in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico
Today the men and women of the Department of State are mourning the murder of three people connected to the
United States Consulate General in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico. One American consulate employee was killed along with her
husband, and the husband of a Mexican employee was also killed. I offer my deepest sympathies to the family, loved
ones and colleagues of these victims. The safety and security of our personnel and their families in Mexico and at posts
around the world is always our highest priority. I have spoken with our Ambassador in Mexico and we are working with
the Government of Mexico to do everything necessary to protect our people and to ensure that the perpetrators of
these horrendous acts are brought to justice.
These appalling assaults on members of our own State Department family are, sadly, part of a growing tragedy besetting
many communities in Mexico. They underscore the imperative of our continued commitment to work closely with the
Government of President Calderon to cripple the influence of trafficking organizations at work in Mexico. This is a
responsibility we must shoulder together, particularly in border communities where strong bonds of history, culture,
and common interest bind the Mexican and the American people closely together."
4837,"Thank you for the kind words! It meant so much to see you speak, and was wonderful to witness that room full of
energetic women and men clapping and nodding--a microcosm of the global movement. I loved the additional stories
you told, esp the women working in the fields and how they could shut down the economy on their own in one swoop.
I'm hard at work on Ireland -- feeling my nationalism stirring!
Thank you again for the email and the chance to join you in NY."
4839,"H: Assume you have seen the ""Petraeus briefing story"" or otherwise are familiar with its contents. In any case, here it is. It
was blazoned atop the Foreign Policy website, the most widely read site on international affairs daily, owned and
published by the Washington Post. Below the piece is a note by its writer about his sourcing that appeared on a small
website elsewhere. Also, I've included an article by Max Blumenthal, who spends his time on this issue and plans to move
to Israel for about 6-8 months to write a book. He tracks a lot of things that do not appear in the mainstream press. Sid
http://mideast.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2010/03/14/the_petraeus_briefing_biden_s_embarrassment_is_not_the_whole_sto
ry
The Petraeus briefing: Biden's embarrassment
is not the whole story
Posted By Mark Perry 4Saturday, March 13, 2010 -
On Jan. 16, two days after a killer earthquake hit Haiti, a team of senior military officers from the U.S. Central Command
(responsible for overseeing American security interests in the Middle East), arrived at the Pentagon to brief Joint Chiefs of
Staff Chairman Adm. Michael Mullen on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The team had been dispatched by CENTCOM
commander Gen. David Petraeus to underline his growing worries at the lack of progress in resolving the issue. The 33-
slide, 45-minute PowerPoint briefing stunned Mullen. The briefers reported that there was a growing perception among
Arab leaders that the U.S. was incapable of standing up to Israel, that CENTCOM's mostly Arab constituency was losing
faith in American promises, that Israeli intransigence on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict was jeopardizing U.S. standing in
the region, and that Mitchell himself was (as a senior Pentagon officer later bluntly described it) ""too old, too slow ... and
too late.""
The January Mullen briefing was unprecedented. No previous CENTCOM commander had ever expressed himself on
what is essentially a political issue; which is why the briefers were careful to tell Mullen that their conclusions followed
from a December 2009 tour of the region where, on Petraeus's instructions, they spoke to senior Arab leaders.
""Everywhere they went, the message was pretty humbling,"" a Pentagon officer familiar with the briefing says. ""America
was not only viewed as weak, but its military posture in the region was eroding."" But Petraeus wasn't finished: two days
after the Mullen briefing, Petraeus sent a paper to the White House requesting that the West Bank and Gaza (which, with
Israel, is a part of the European Command -- or EUCOM), be made a part of his area of operations. Petraeus's reason
was straightforward: with U.S. troops deployed in Iraq and Afghanistan, the U.S. military had to be perceived by Arab
leaders as engaged in the region's most troublesome conflict.
[UPDATE: A senior military officer denied Sunday that Petraeus sent a paper to the White House.
""CENTCOM did have a team brief the CJCS on concerns revolving around the Palestinian issue, and CENTCOM did
propose a UCP change, but to CJCS, not to the WH,"" the officer said via email. ""GEN Petraeus was not certain what
might have been conveyed to the WH (if anything) from that brief to CJCS.""
(UCP means ""unified combatant command,"" like CENTCOM; CJCS refers to Mullen; and WH is the White House.)]
The Mullen briefing and Petraeus's request hit the White House like a bombshell. While Petraeus's request that
CENTCOM be expanded to include the Palestinians was denied (""it was dead on arrival,"" a Pentagon officer confirms),
the Obama administration decided it would redouble its efforts -- pressing Israel once again on the settlements issue,
sending Mitchell on a visit to a number of Arab capitals and dispatching Mullen for a carefully arranged meeting with the
chief of the Israeli General Staff, Lt. General Gabi Ashkenazi. While the American press speculated that Mullen's trip
focused on Iran, the JCS Chairman actually carried a blunt, and tough, message on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict: that
Israel had to see its conflict with the Palestinians ""in a larger, regional, context"" -- as having a direct impact on America's
status in the region. Certainly, it was thought, Israel would get the message.
Israel didn't. When Vice President Joe Biden was embarrassed by an Israeli announcement that the Netanyahu
government was building 1,600 new homes in East Jerusalem, the administration reacted. But no one was more outraged
than Biden who, according to the Israeli daily Yedioth Ahronoth, engaged in a private, and angry, exchange with the
Israeli Prime Minister. Not surprisingly, what Biden told Netanyahu reflected the importance the administration attached to
Petraeus's Mullen briefing: ""This is starting to get dangerous for us,"" Biden reportedly told Netanyahu. ""What you're doing
here undermines the security of our troops who are fighting in Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan. That endangers us and it
endangers regional peace."" Yedioth Ahronoth went on to report: ""The vice president told his Israeli hosts that since many
people in the Muslim world perceived a connection between Israel's actions and US policy, any decision about
construction that undermines Palestinian rights in East Jerusalem could have an impact on the personal safety of
American troops fighting against Islamic terrorism."" The message couldn't be plainer: Israel's intransigence could cost
American lives.
There are important and powerful lobbies in America: the NRA, the American Medical Association, the lawyers -- and the
Israeli lobby. But no lobby is as important, or as powerful, as the U.S. military. While commentators and pundits might
reflect that Joe Biden's trip to Israel has forever shifted America's relationship with its erstwhile ally in the region, the real
break came in January, when David Petraeus sent a briefing team to the Pentagon with a stark warning: America's
relationship with Israel is important, but not as important as the lives of America's soldiers. Maybe Israel gets the message
now.
Mark Perry's newest book is Talking To Terrorists
http://warincontext.org/2olo/o3/14/israel-is-putting-american-liyes-at-risk/
My piece on the briefing of Admiral Mullen by CENTCOM senior officers has occasioned a great deal of comment, as
well as some skepticism: how accurate is the account? Was it told to me by direct participants in the briefing? Is
there any basis for imagining that Petraeus has any kind of hidden agenda, whether that is a desire to expand
CENTCOM — or even hostility towards Israel.
I won't name my sources, even though it's clear to people in the Pentagon — and certainly to General Petraeus — who
they are. Was I told of the briefing by the briefers themselves? I will only say that there were four people in the
briefing — the two briefers, Admiral Mullen, and Admiral Mullen's primary adviser on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. I know two of the people involved in the briefing. Whether or not they are my sources is something for the
reader to determine. The account is not only accurate, it's a precis of what actually happened. There is a lot more to
it. The White House, State Department and Pentagon have not denied the account, and for good reason: it's true.
Is there any basis for imagining that Petraeus has any kind of hidden agenda in ordering the briefing?
I have been reporting on the American military for thirty years. My work on the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Four Stars, is
the authoritative account on the subject. I have deeply rooted contacts in the military that go back thirty years. I
have never met a senior military officer whom I do not admire. There is no greater insult than to believe that General
Petraeus or any other senior American military officer would use the lives of American soldiers as a lever to enhance
their own political future. My sense is that General Petraeus neither likes nor dislikes Israel: but he loves his country
and he wants to protect our soldiers. The current crisis in American relations with Israel is not a litmus test of
General Petraeus's loyalty to Israel, but of his, and our, concern for those Americans in uniform in the Middle East.
It is, perhaps, a sign of the depth of ""the Biden crisis"" that every controversy of this type seems to get translated into
whether or not America and its leaders are committed to Israel's security. This isn't about Israel's security, it's about
our security.
http://maxblumenthal.com/2010/03/pastor-hagee-and-
netanyahus-lovefest-on-eve-of-bidens-arrival-in-israel/
Netanyahu and Pastor Hagee's Lovefest on Eve of Biden's
Arrival in Israel
On 03.09.10, By Max
(Videos recorded by Rachel Tabachnick; more videos coming shortly.)
Vice President Joe Biden was greeted in Jerusalem with the announcement that the Israeli Interior Ministry approved the
construction of 1600 new homes in Occupied East Jerusalem contrary to U.S. wishes and complicating Biden's mission to
help jump start the peace process. But Biden should have known that Prime Minister Bibi Netanyahu intended to upset his
plans by Netanyahu's appearance with John Hagee.
The day after a series of talks between US Special Envoy for the Middle East George Mitchell and Netanyahu, and a day
before Biden's arrival, Netanyahu appeared onstage with Pastor John Hagee in Jerusalem. The occasion was Hagee's
Night To Honor Israel, an event the far-right Texas-based preacher arranged to tout his ministry's millions in donations to
Israeli organizations and to level bellicose rhetoric against Israel's perceived enemies.
At the gathering, Hagee called Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad ""the Hitler of the Middle East"" and denounced
the Goldstone Report as ""character assassination by an unbiased and uninformed committee.""
Netanyahu welcomed the crowd of 1000 American evangelicals to Jerusalem, a city he described as ""the undivided,
eternal capitol of the Jewish people. Then, he told them, ""I salute you! The Jewish people salute you!"" He used the rest of
his speech to call for ""tough, biting sanctions"" against Iran that ""bite deep into its energy sector.""
Hagee and Netanyahu appear together on stage:
r--
X
In the audience were top-level members of the Israeli government, from Ambassador Michael Oren to Jerusalem Mayor
Nir Barkat to Deputy Foreign Minister Danny Ayalon. Also present was Rabbi Shlomo Riskin, the chief rabbi of the illegal
West Bank settlement of Efrat who gained notoriety for lobbying President Bill Clinton to pardon his friend, fugitive
billionaire Marc Rich. Ayalon had stirred controversy days before when he refused to meet with a US congressional
delegation brought to Israel by the progressive Jewish group J Street.
Part One of Hagee's speech:
X
Part Two.
X
Pastor Hagee in Jerusalem 3/8/10 (Part II) from Max J Blumenthal on Vimeo.
Hagee's ceremony featured a 15-minute film highlighting the recipients of donations from John Hagee Ministries that
totaled $58 million since 2001. The recipients included Jewish settlements from the West Bank like Gush Etzion and
Shomron, which was involved in promoting an ""Obama Hilltop project"" that promoted more settlement building and
compared Obama to Pharoah. Hagee also announced funding for a pressure group run by the settlers evacuated from
Gush Katif in Gaza in 2005. During Israel's assault on Gaza in 2009, a group of Gush Katif residents lobbied the Israel
government to allow them to resettle the Palestinian coastal region.
Who is Hagee funding in Israel?
X
Who Is Haoee Funding In Israel? from Max Blumenthal on Vimeo.
The most notable of Hagee's funding recipients was an organization called Im Tirtzu. A student representative of this
group appeared in the film to thank Hagee for ""help[ing] us to ensure that students in Israel are on the right path, the path
of Zionism, the love of Israel, the path of solidarity."" Another student called for ""the second revolution in Israel.""
In February, Im Tirtzu funding a smear campaign against former Knesset member and New Israel Fund Director Naomi
Chazan that included posters caricaturing her with a horn on her head. The group misleadingly accused the New Israel
Fund of bankrolling 16 human rights organizations that contributed documentation to the Goldstone Report.
The smear campaign led to unsuccessful legislation in the Knesset designed to further cripple already marginalized Israeli
human rights groups. Meanwhile, the Jerusalem Post fired Chazan as a columnist without explanation. Gideon Levy, a
columnist for Ha'aretz, called Im Tirtzu ""a McCarthyite movement"" for its attacks on Chazan.
Although CUFI attempted to distance itself from Im Tirtzu's campaign, the organization's appearance during CUFI's
Jerusalem ceremony suggested that Hagee would continue to provide it with funding well into the future.
Republican Senator John McCain repudiated the endorsement of Hagee during his 2008 presidential campaign after
Hagee's statements describing the Holocaust as a fulfillment of divine prophecy came to light. Hagee has also said that
he believed the anti-Christ was ""partially Jewish, as was Adolph Hitler."" However, none of Hagee's comments have
deterred Israeli government officials from embracing him or accepting his millions in annual charity.
During Hagee's speech, he made no secret of his support for the illegal settlement enterprise that has been the source of
difficulties between the US and Israel. ""The settlements are not the problem,"" he boomed from the podium. ""The problem
is the refusal of Arab leaders to respect the right of Jewish people to live anywhere in the Middle East.""
Hagee received a rousing ovation from the crowd and the Israeli government officials seated beside the podium when he
proclaimed, ""World leaders do not have the authority to tell Israel and the Jewish people what they can and cannot do in
the city of Jerusalem. They don't have the authority to tell them what they can and cannot build, who can and and cannot
live there.""
The following day, on March 9, Vice President Joseph Biden arrived in Israel to meet with Netanyahu and officials from
the Palestinian Authority. He told reporters after touching down that he saw ""a moment of real opportunity."""
4840,"Outreach Center
From Al Quds should be the front piece of all our presentations I"
4841,"Madam Secretary, .
Thanks so much for the experience of a life time. It is my honor to work for you and learn from you.
See you this morning,
Best,
Ellen"
4842,"I think coming out in next few hours so prepare W.IC.
Cdm"
4844,"A draft of the year-end report is coming your way with Huma. It definitely needs your magic touch. I've done my best to
craft something readable (and useful) in the midst of all the craziness.
Derek has read and commented. Cheryl will give her comments tomorrow. I'd be happy to circulate it to others who
you would like to have weigh in.
Look forward to discussing tomorrow."
4845,"Importance: High
FYI — I think we should do"
4847,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, March 26, 2010 6:33 PM
Mills, Cheryl D
Fw: Wynn Resorts as Sponsor"
4848,fyi
4849,"Not now - calling then going to bed. B6
XO"
4850,"I am traveling outside of the country, with intermittent access to my email. If you need to reach me urgently please
contact Nora Toiv, Toivnf@state.gov, 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych, laszczychj@state.gov, 202-647-5548.
Thank you
cdm"
4852,"That was great, thank you for doing"
4854,"730 Afghan FM Rasoul
745 Maldivian President Nasheed"
4856,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, January 20, 2010 7:20 AM
FW: It Never Rains.....
fyi"
4858,Taking off
4859,"Already doing so; will intensify.
PJ"
4860,"importance: High
Jake, Jack is to call Palau's president iater today, presurnabiy to unveii and push a new free assoclation aid proposal. The
arocosai can succeed or fail depending upon how it is handled and flexibiiity in working out cletaii.
The amount has been discussed as $250 million .thrki FY24 -- and ; think that -.amount could be made to work -- but it is
handicapped by a bl,"",sin to take out of that 1;) to $18.75 rri foi- the other two freely es,
.:dciated states and count ';')13.3 m
already appropriated funding. Most
important is a willingness to sit down and mutually work out terms.
As I've said, I think the Compact Review can succeed if there is real
dialogue vs. 'This is it' proposais. It is also critIcai to
understand Pres. Toriblong astutely up a small tf,arn of key Palau inadiers for the Rciviw to ensure that a proposai
can sain fuiianpnPval in Palau and he and they are i,ivorkins in complete. unison. Jeff
Jeff
Jeffrey L. Farrow"
4861,"Be
Will call after 1pm - on calls until llam to get legislation"
4862,"Your speech tomorrow should be crystal clear, expJcit and tough on China and spell out the economic consequences not
iust for the Chinese and their future but for the economic future of ordinary working people in the USA and their stake in
successful diplomacy on the issue: and why their future is the basis of our national interest. The future of the middle class
irz the future of the United Sc the interests of the middle CialSS are the heart of the national interest, etc. Sid"
4863,"Madame Secretary, April Ryan asked me to pass along to you that Dorothy Height has taken a turn for the worse and is
not expected to survive long.
Pi"
4864,"Thx pj.
Adding philippe too cause a joint draft statement is in the works."
4865,"Want to let you know about an ops alert we just got, will keep u updated:
Ahmed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, younger brother of UAE President Khalifa bin Zayed al Nahyan, is presumed dead following
a glider crash in a Moroccan lake on Friday. Sources close to embassy report UAE authorities will make the formal
announcement after the conclusion of a significant horse racing event in Dubai later on March 27."
4867,Yep.
4868,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, June 20, 2010 10:54 AM
H
Follow up"
4869,Bill and I discussed
4870,"This is what we propose to put out, with Rs putting out similar:
Today, Secretary Clinton spoke by telephone with Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov. They discussed preparations for the
upcoming June 24 summit between President Obama and President Medvedev. Secretary Clinton and Foreign Minister
Lavrov reveiwed developments in Kyrgyzstan and stressed their shared concern over the recent violence and continuing
interethnic tensions. The ministers agreed that the issue of the upcoming referendum us the sovereign decision of
Kyrgyzstan to make and agreed to encourage the authorities of Kyrgyzstan to conduct it according to international
standards with the monitoring support of OSCE and others. The ministers also discussed coordination of U.S. and
Russian humanitarian assistance and other support to Kyrgyzstan to help its authorities restore security, stability, and
reconciliation among all citizens of Kyrgyzstan."
4871,Roger that.
4872,Russian MFA plans to release a parallel press statement shortly and is faxing us the text.
4873,"• aClose Window
• Print this lop_ag_
From The Sunday Times
March 28, 2010
It's over: MPs say the special relationship with
S is dead
Winston Churchill, Franklin D Roosevelt and Josef Stalin
Michael Smith
BRITAIN'S special relationship with the US forged by Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt in the second world
war -- no longer exists, says a committee of influential MPs.
Instead, America's relationship with Britain is no more special than with its other main allies, according to a report by the
Commons foreign affairs committee published today.
The report also warns that the perception of the UK after the Iraq war as America's ""subservient poodle"" has been highly
damaging to Britain's reputation and interests around the world. The MPs conclude that British prime ministers have to
learn to be less deferential to US presidents and be ""willing to say no"" to America.
The report, entitled Global Security: UK-US Relations, says Britain's relationship with America is ""extremely close and
valuable"" in a number of areas, particularly intelligence co-operation. However, it adds that the use of the phrase special
relationship, in its historical sense, ""is potentially misleading and we recommend that its use should be avoided"".
It does not reflect the ""ever-evolving"" relationship between the two countries and raises unrealistic expectations, the MPs
say.
""Over the longer term, the UK is unlikely to be able to influence the US to the extent it has in the past,"" the committee
adds.
In an apparent rebuke to Tony Blair and his relationship with President George W Bush, the report says there are ""many
lessons"" to be learnt from Britain's political approach towards the US over Iraq.
""The perception that the British government was a subservient poodle to the US administration is widespread both among
the British public and overseas,"" the MPs say. ""This perception, whatever its relation to reality, is deeply damaging to the
reputation and interests of the UK.""
While the relationship between the American president and the British prime minister was an important part of dealings
between the two countries, the cabinet and parliament also had a role to play. ""The UK needs to be less deferential and
more willing to say no to the US on those issues where the two countries' interests and values diverge,"" the MPs say.
They are also critical of the US use of extraordinary rendition and torture. The report calls for a comprehensive review of
the use by the CIA of British bases, such as that on the Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia, to carry out extraordinary
rendition.
""The issues relating to rendition through Diego Garcia to which we have previously drawn attention raise disturbing
questions about the uses to which US bases on British territory are put"", the MPs say.
They express regret at ""considerable restraints"" on the ability of both the government and parliament to scrutinise US
activities carried out on British territory.
""We recommend that the government should establish a comprehensive review of the current arrangements governing
US military use of facilities within the UK and in British overseas territories."" The review should ""identify shortcomings in
the current system of scrutiny and oversight ... and report to parliament on proposals to remedy these"".
The report also demands a statement from the government on the implications of the Court of Appeal judgment regarding
the alleged collusion of MI5 in the torture of Binyam Mohamed, a British resident.
Last month the court ordered the government to release evidence from American intelligence reports which showed that
MI5 was aware of the torture.
Senior US officials subsequently suggested that releasing such evidence might prevent the US from sharing some
intelligence with Britain.
Contact our advertising team for advertising and sponsorship in Times Online, The Times and The Sunday Times, or
place your advertisement.
Times Online Services: Dating I Jobs I Property Search I Used Cars I Holidays I Births lvlarriages, Deaths I
Subscrlptions I E-paper
News International associated websites: Milkround
Copyright 2010 Times Newspapers Ltd.
This service is provided on Times Newspapers' standard Terms and Conditions. Please read our Privacy Policy.To inquire
about a licence to reproduce material from Times Online, The Times or The Sunday Times, click hece.This website is
published by a member of the News International Group. News International Limited, 1 Virginia St,-London E98 1XY, is
the holding company for the News International group and is registered in England No 81701. VAT number GB 243 8054
69."
4874,From haim.
4875,"MS -- As you may recall,
Do you think that would work?
Lona Valmoro
S • ecial Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
4876,"Below is a readout of Mitchell's meeting with Ashton. Recommendation is for you to
I've sent points to Huma.
David followed up with Russian envoy who hadn't heard from Lavrov, but David feels comfortable having you
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
— Declassify on: 06/19/2035"
4877,"Here's where things stand, from Jeffrey:
Called Davut when efforts to get Sinir failed (on plane prob). Davut confirmed substance of Jake S's comments to me,
said he Davut had one hour to get statement out to meet TU press cycle, and said Namik Tan would contact me asap
with proposed text. That said Davut then described substance of what he thought should be in it (he also was not clear
on whether it to be a joint statement, coordinated sep statements or just a TU statement that we'd OK and thus
support once out). However he did say he wanted to put in statement
We went back and forth on that and both conluded Namik and I would work out. Will get back
asap. Jim"
4879,"FYI
INTERNATIONAL NEWS #843
June 21, 2010
by Rex Wockner
Iceland legalizes same-sex marriage
The Icelandic parliament, Albingi, legalized same-sex marriage June 11. The vote was 49-0. Fourteen MPs
skipped the vote.
Same-sex couples will be able to marry starting June 27.
The registered-partnership apparatus that gay couples used in the past will no longer be available.
The national LGBT association, Samtokin 78, said Iceland had removed the last obstacle to equal rights for all.
Iceland is the ninth nation where same-sex couples can marry nationwide and the 11th nation where same-sex
marriage is possible.
Icelandic Prime Minister Johanna Siguroardottir is openly lesbian.
Gay marriage also is legal in Belgium, Canada, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Mexico City, Connecticut, Iowa, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont and Washington, D.C."
4880,"Below is the final text of the Quartet statement, which Lavrov, Ban, and Ashton have now agreed to release *without a
call.* Sounds like your discussion with Lavrov did the trick:
The Quartet re-affirms that the current situation in Gaza, including the humanitarian and human rights situation of the
civilian population, is unsustainable, unacceptable, and not in the interests of any of those concerned. The Quartet
reiterates its call for a solution that addresses Israel's legitimate security concerns, including an end to weapons
smuggling into Gaza; promotes Palestinian unity based on the Palestine Liberation Organization commitments and the
reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under the legitimate Palestinian Authority; and ensures the unimpeded flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza, consistent with United Nations Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009). The Quartet declares its readiness to work closely with Israel, the Palestinian Government and
international donors in order to achieve sustainable economic development on the basis of the full implementation of
the Agreement on Access and Movement of 2005 and in the broader perspective of the two-state solution.
Consistent with these objectives, the Quartet and the Quartet Representative have worked with Israel, as well as
consulting the Palestinian Authority, Egypt, and other concerned parties, to effect a fundamental change in policy in
Gaza. The new policy towards Gaza just announced by the Government of Israel is a welcome development. The Quartet
notes that the elaboration of further details and modalities of implementation will be important in ensuring the
effectiveness of the new policy. Full and effective implementation will comprise a significant shift in strategy towards
meeting the needs of Gaza's population for humanitarian and commercial goods, civilian reconstruction and
infrastructure, and legitimate economic activity as well as the security needs of Israel. The Quartet will continue to work
with Israel, the Palestinian Authority, and other concerned parties to ensure these arrangements are implemented as
quickly as possible. The Quartet affirms that much work remains to achieve fully the solution stated above, and, in
consultation with the concerned parties, it will monitor closely the implementation of the policy in all its aspects. It will
actively explore additional ways to improve the situation in Gaza, encourage involvement of the PA at the crossings and
promote greater commerce between the West Bank and Gaza.
The Quartet stresses the importance of United Nations and other international interventions, as well as the work of local
non-governmental organizations, to be expanded in Gaza to meet urgent civilian needs, and calls on all parties to fully
enable this work.
The Quartet recognizes that Israel has legitimate security concerns that must continue to be safeguarded, and believes
efforts to maintain security while enabling movement and access for Palestinian people and goods are critical. The
Quartet commits to work with Israel and the international community to prevent the illicit trafficking of arms and
ammunition into Gaza. It urges all those wishing to deliver goods to do so through established channels so that their
cargo can be inspected and transferred via land crossings into Gaza. The Quartet emphasizes that there is no need for
unnecessary confrontations and calls on all parties to act responsibly in meeting the needs of the people of Gaza.
The Quartet also calls for an end to the deplorable detention of Gilad Shalit in advance of the fourth anniversary of his
capture on June 25; it further condemns the violation of Hamas' international obligation to provide him access by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and demands that Hamas immediately remedy the situation.
The Quartet also reiterates its support for proximity talks toward the resumption, without pre-conditions, of direct
bilateral negotiations that resolve all final status issues as previously agreed by the parties. The Quartet believes these
negotiations should lead to a settlement, negotiated between the parties within 24 months, that ends the occupation
which began in 1967 and results in the emergence of an independent, democratic, and viable Palestinian state in the
West Bank and Gaza, living side by side in peace and security with Israel and its other neighbours."
4881,Article from cdm
4883,"We are characterizing it this way. Our only rep in the chair, a working-level officer, walked out with many other
countries in solidarity over the first of a series of accusations in his speech. We are trying to keep our first response
limited. Later we can add more specificity.
PJ"
4884,"As I mentioned last week, I was on a panel at the Brussels forum with Lady Ashton (who insisted everyone call her
Cathy), Estonian president Toomas lives, and Senator Voinovich. Ashton and I essentially reinforced each other at every
turn and presented a very positive vision of US-EU partnership. She has scored some significant victories lately, most
notably that development will be included in the European Action Service (EAS) rather than sitting at a separate desk
(the formula we are seeking rather than the DFID formula). EU defense staff will also be included in the EAS. Indeed,
Ashton chairs the European Council whenever the 27 foreign ministers, development ministers, or defense ministers
meet -- the ultimate integrated frame. She also has control over a number of the smaller development and state-
building budgets, though I gather the biggest development fund is still in dispute between her and the development
commissioner. Apparently, however, the enlargement commissioner took his cues from her on strategy and policy and
then presented his implementation plans to the Council, which is the role she wants. We should be able to build on the
way the EU is organizing in pushing pushing our own integrated frame here.
I hope everything goes well on Ottawa and NY. Bob Hormats and I will send a note on other aspects of Brussels forum,
where US was well represented. AM"
4885,"PVerveer
Sunday, March 28, 2010 9:03 PM
Fwd: FW: Recruit Afghan women to sell war to Europeans: CIA report
Interesting.
Recruit Afghan women to sell war to Europeans: CIA report
WASHINGTON, March 27, 2010 (AFP) - A CIA expert has called for recruiting Afghan women in a public
relations bid to persuade skeptical Europeans to support the NATO-led war effort, according to a document
leaked Friday.
""Afghan women could serve as ideal messengers in humanizing"" the mission for European audiences,
particularly in France, according to the CIA analysis, posted on WikiLeaks, a whistleblower website.
The views of Afghan women would carry special weight as they could express ""their aspirations for the future,
and their fears of a Taliban victory,"" it said.
The Central Intelligence Agency declined to confirm or deny if the document was genuine. But WikiLeaks has
previously posted government and corporate documents that were later verified.
The report by a CIA expert on ""strategic communications"" and State Department analysts of public opinion
warned that popular support for the war in Europe was weak and could easily collapse, citing the recent fall of
the Dutch government over the issue.
""The tone of previous debate suggests that a spike in French or German casualties or in Afghan civilian
casualties could become a tipping point in converting passive opposition into active calls for immediate
withdrawal,"" it said.
The analysis, dated March 11, suggested public relations strategies to drum up support for the war in Germany
and France, which maintain the third and fourth largest troop deployments in Afghanistan.
""Outreach initiatives that create media opportunities for Afghan women to share their stories with French,
German, and other European women could help to overcome pervasive skepticism among women in Western
Europe toward the ISAF (International Security Assistance Force) mission,"" it said.
Public relations efforts could ""tap into acute French concern for civilians and refugees,"" the report said,
suggesting highlighting polls that show most Afghans support the presence of coalition troops.
Such an approach could stress the potential dangers facing Afghan civilians if NATO-led troops were defeated
and ""leverage French (and other European) guilt for abandoning them.""
""The prospect of the Taliban rolling back hard-won progress on girls I- education could provoke French
indignation, become a rallying point for France's largely secular public, and give voters a reason to support a
good and necessary cause despite casualties.""
For German audiences, marketing efforts should underline how Afghans are reportedly optimistic about the
NATO mission and how an international retreat would damage Germany's interests.
""For example, messages that illustrate how a defeat in Afghanistan could heighten Germany's exposure to
terrorism, opium, and refugees might help to make the war more salient to skeptics,"" it said.
The report also suggested taking advantage of President Barack Obama's popularity in France and Germany,
arguing that appeals from the US president on the importance of the allied role in the war could have a positive
effect.
The memorandum is titled: ""Afghanistan: Sustaining West European Support for the NATO-led Mission -- Why
Counting on Apathy Might Not Be Enough.""
Media Analysis and Watch Center
USSTRATCOM Foreign Media Analysis Program
SOS International Ltd.
www.sosiltd.com"
4886,Will do. 111 talk to Ryabkov in the morning. Bill
4887,Will follow up.
4888,"FYI. Good news on at least one front.
jm"
4889,"Here's a basic summary:
It focused on citing the illegitimacy of US nuclear and nonproliferation policy, and on highlighting that it is the nuclear
weapons states which are to blame for both proliferation and global instability. The speech suggested that US
nonproliferation efforts are a cynical attempt to divert attention from our aim to keep nuclear weapons for ourselves
and that even things like the Nuclear Summit are nothing more than such a veil. The speech made several pointed
attacks on the USG, from the USAF's security issue a few years ago to our use of nuclear weapons in WWII (making us
""the most hated"" in history) to allegations of support for terrorism (including that only states who have and have used
nuclear weapons could support nuclear terrorism). The speech offered 11 ""proposals"", most of which were previewed
in Tehran press today. These include legally binding NSAs, suspension of IAEA membership for those who threaten with
nuclear weapons, disarming all US nuclear bases, support for a ME w/o nuclear weapons and restructure of the UNSC.
The US del walked out -- with many partners -- in response to this speech."
4891,Jim concurs in the memo recommendations.
4892,ok
4893,"Bombings in Moscow
Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims of this morning's bombings in Moscow, their families, and all the people
of Russia. This brutal assault on innocent civilians is another reminder that terrorism is a threat to peace-loving people
everywhere and must be met with unwavering resolve. I will offer my personal condolences to Foreign Minister Lavrov
later today in Ottawa. Together with our G8 partners, we will discuss how to improve international counterterrorism
coordination and cooperation. I was in Moscow earlier this month, and I know the resilience and determination of the
Russian people. The United States stands with them today and everyday in solidarity against violent extremism in all its
forms."
4894,"Finally.
For wjc"
4895,"Gates
He advances a powerful vision of integrated civilian power w/ State and USAID under you in his Foreign Affairs article. I
don't think you need to get into the State/AID details w/ him, but it wd be great to give him a heads up that you think
that the PSD as written moves toward 3 separate pillars of defense, development, and diplomacy rather than reinforcing
the integrated power frame of the Nat. Security Strategy. AM"
4896,"This is just fyi for my out of office planning/scheduling purposes:
22 June (T): afternoon in NY
2Ju1 — 9Jul: annual leave
19Jul — 23Jul: travel with S
25Aug — 27 Aug/1 Sep — 3Sep (T): out of office
1 Sep: Haiti travel"
4897,Fyi
4899,"Below is the Iran section of the chair's statement from Trieste. There is strong language on human rights; is that what
Miliband was referring to? The language on the nuclear issue reflects where we were last summer -- still on the first
track.
Iran
We are concerned about the aftermath of Iranian Presidential elections. We fully respect the sovereignty of Iran. At the
same time, we deplore post-electoral violence, which led to the loss of lives of Iranian civilians. We express our solidarity
with those who have suffered repression while peacefully demonstrating and urge Iran to respect fundamental human
rights, including freedom of expression, as ensured by the international treaties it has ratified. The crisis should be
settled soon through democratic dialogue and peaceful means on the basis of the rule of law. We call on the Iranian
government to guarantee that the will of the Iranian people is reflected in the electoral process.
We remain committed to finding a diplomatic solution to the issue of Iran's nuclear program and support renewed
efforts to that effect, such as the readiness of the U.S. to enter into direct talks and the invitation from China, France,
Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States to Iran to restart negotiations, as well as the constructive
involvement of other G8 partners in the process. We stress the need for unity of action on the basis of agreed policy. We
sincerely hope that Iran will seize this opportunity to give diplomacy a chance to find a negotiated solution to the
nuclear issue. At the same time we remain deeply concerned over proliferation risks posed by Iran's nuclear programme.
We recognise that Iran has the right to a civilian nuclear programme, but that comes with the responsibility to restore
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear activities. We strongly urge Iran to cooperate fully with the
IAEA and to comply with the relevant UNSC Resolutions.
Our meeting on the margin of the United Nations General Assembly opening week next September, will be an occasion
for the G8 to take stock of the situation."
4900,"Just the stuff from yesterday. Maybe one of the cable nets or talking heads made a to do about it.
But I'm surprised because it didn't seem anyone here cared, was all Canada"
4901,"I haven't seen anything real in our press.
Original 'Message"
4902,fyi
4903,"Morales blasted the U.S. efforts in Haiti today. See below. Craig Kelly and I agree that you should consider a call to
Morales. Perhaps we could discuss tomorrow."
4904,"Should have been faxed
Checking now."
4905,"Just fyi, thought you might be interested in the opening line of a pamphlet that the British policy
planning office put out on ""Better International Policy."" The Introduction, written by the
Permanent Under-Secretary of States, opens: ""The FCO is at the centre of policy making on
international issues in Whitehall. We are the experts in government at analyzing and influencing
what is happening overseas and in turning this into clear and well-judged policy advice for
Ministers.""
have sent this to Jack, Jim, Jake, and Cheryl. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
4906,It's on its way with the book but someone will fax now.
4907,Book will be there in 10 minutes.
4908,Sorry - first I've heard of it. Philippe and I are sitting on the shuttle which takes off at 6. I'll catch up w Cheryl after.
4910,Meant to write that Solomon is a tough critic.
4911,"I really like Rick
See b/I in case you get ques at press conf re urgent needs being crowded out by recovery
Cdm"
4912,"Delivery has failed to these recipients or distribution lists:
tillemnantsOstate.gov
The recipient's e-mail address was not found in the recipient's e-mail system. Microsoft Exchange will not try to redeliver
this message for you. Please check the e-mail address and try resending this message, or provide the following diagnostic
text to your system administrator.
Diagnostic information for administrators:
Generating server: MSWASHDCIB01.washdc.state.sbu
tillemnants@state.gov
#< #5.1.1> #SMTP#
Original message headers:
Received: from vance3.state.gov ([10.4.16.249]) by
MSWASHDCIB01.washdc.state.sbu with Microsoft SMTPSVC(6.0.3790.3959); Wed, 20
Jan 2010 22:30:18 -0500
Received: from mail.c1intonemail.com (ool-18bbeabb.static.optonline.net [24.187.234.187])
by vance3.state.gov with ESMTP id o0L30mHNO11693;
Wed, 20 Jan 2010 22:00:48 -0500
Received: from CLNTINET08.clinton.local ([fe80::dObb:23d3:f75e:4993]) by
CLNTINET08.clinton.local ([fe80::d0bb:23d3:f75e:4993%10]) with mapi; Wed, 20
Jan 2010 22:30:16 -0500"
4913,Added here.
4914,"On the phone with Bader,"
4915,"little has changed in substance or language.
Still working on it, though."
4916,No problem.
4917,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, March 31, 2010 7:59 AM
H
Fw: Did u hear anything from F
-1
Fyi"
4918,"Thanks very much. On your questions:
Also, pls be sure the text is carefully proofread since there are a number of typos and missing words.
Absolutely -- sorry about that.
Thanks,
Tomicah"
4919,You'll have a new draft when you wake up. I think it's getting close but can use one more pass from you.
4920,"sbwhoeop
Wednesday, March 31, 2010 9:06 AM
H: NI fallout continues. Sid
New blow for Conservative alliance with UUP
as assembly member quits party
Alan McFarland follows MP Lady Hermon in resigning from Ulster Unionists to sit as independent
• Henry McDonaid, Ireland correspondent
• gi,;ardian.co.uk, Wednesday 31 March 2010 09.48 BST
The ConseNatives' alliance with the Ulster Unionists has sustained a second blow in North Down after last week's
resignation of the sitting MP Lady Hermon.
Assembly member and former army major Alan McFarland announced today that he was leaving the UUP in protest at its
pact with the Tories.
It is expected McFarland will now work for Herman's re-election as an independent against the official UUP-Tory
candidate.
A UUP statement said the timing of McFarland's announcement was ""disappointing"". He has been a UUP member of the
Stormont assembly for 12 years and was once a loyal ally of Lord Trimble, Nprthem Irelard's former first minister.
Trimble has been one of the driving forces behind the UUP-Conservative alliance.
Last night McFarland resigned his membership of the party and said he would now sit as an independent member of the
assembly.
""With the recent confirmation of candidates, including the imposition of a Conservative candidate in my own North Down
constituency,•it is clear that the party is determined to continue down the Conservative road,"" he said in a statement.
""I do not wish to join them. I am sorry to leave a party that contains many good friends, and greatly regret that events have
developed in the way they have.""
Last week Hermon, the MP for North Down, said she would run in the general election as an independent unionist.
In a statement, the Ulster Unionist party thanked McFarland for his service, but said the ""electoral pact has the potential to
transform politics in Northern Ireland in a manner not previously witnessed"" in Ulster."
4921,"Madame Secretary:
Pardon the early morning email, but I am responding to your invitation to send you our thoughts on Haiti. You
probably have already had all the thoughts below, but I wanted to put mine in writing. First, and most
important, thanks for what you have done thus far, which has been remarkable. One week in, we have reacted
most admirably to the Haiti crisis. State and AID are firmly in the lead; you, Cheryl, Raj, and Jake have done a
heroic job; and the most urgent humanitarian challenges seem in hand. Although I have not participated in
many of the departmental conversations about Haiti, based on my years thinking about that country. I wanted to
offer suggestions that might prove helpful on the next round of interrelated challenges:
, —
Best,
Harold
Harold Hon61.1 Koh"
4922,And the speech was excellent.
4925,Fyi
4927,"Team would like to release following statement. Okay by you?
MEDIA NOTE
Joint Statement on the Upcoming Sudan National Elections
Following is the text of a joint statement by U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Norwegian Foreign Minister Jonas
Store, and United Kingdom Foreign Secretary David Miliband on the upcoming national elections in Sudan.
Begin Text:
National elections in Sudan this month will represent a major milestone in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement that
ended Sudan's twenty-two year civil war, and are an important opportunity for the people of Sudan to participate in the
political process.
We urge all parties in Sudan to work urgently to ensure that elections can proceed peacefully and credibly in April. We
are deeply concerned by reports of continued administrative and logistical challenges, as well as restrictions on political
freedoms. We call on the Government of Sudan, the National Elections Commission, and all political parties to engage in
further dialogue to resolve practical obstacles, procedural impediments, and address allegations of intimidation,
harassment, and safety concerns, and other legitimate concerns raised by various political parties. We continue to urge
the parties to improve conditions on the ground in Darfur and create a secure environment conducive to Darfuri
participation.
Irrespective of the outcome of elections, it is essential that work continues and is accelerated to meet remaining CPA
deadlines. Progress is needed urgently to complete border demarcation, to establish the commissions that will
supervise the referenda for the South and Abyei, to conduct popular consultations in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan,
and to negotiate sustainable post-CPA arrangements in areas such as wealth-sharing, citizenship and assets, and
liabilities.
We reiterate our commitment to ensure that the referenda must happen on schedule and that their outcomes need to
be respected. It is time to redouble efforts to achieve these ends. We urge all parties in Sudan and all regional and
international partners to work together to achieve the peaceful future that the people of Sudan deserve."
4928,"I did. I had been told it was a wet kiss to the NSC. It wasn't. You and Gates look good.
What did you think?"
4930,In case u see hbj
4931,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 2, 2010 9:16 PM
H; Doug Band
Fw: Thank You
For wjc fyi too"
4932,"HOUSTON — (March 31, 2010) - Former First Lady Barbara Bush was discharged Wednesday from The Methodist Hospital
in Houston after undergoing a series of tests. Doctors believe Mrs. Bush, 84, may have had a mild relapse of her Graves
disease, a thyroid condition for which she was treated in 1989. As a result, her physicians at Methodist have adjusted
her medication. Upon discharge she was alert, talkative and appeared to be getting stronger as she prepared to return
home.
Mrs. Bush arrived Saturday at the hospital, where she received a number of tests including blood tests and imaging
studies. Just over a year ago Mrs. Bush received a replacement aortic valve at Methodist, which doctors said is working
very well.
Mrs. Bush is expected to make a full recovery and should soon return to her normal activities."
4933,"This is further background on the Mashabane call,"
4934,"sbwhoeop
Wednesday, March 31, 2010 4:28 PM
H: In case you haven't seen this in today's FT. Sid
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/O/df53a396-3c2a-11df-b40c-00144feabdc0.html
• Skip to main content, accesskev 's""
• Homecage, accesskev '1'
Financial Times FT.com
pOMMENT
:Analysis
• Close
RI
US foreign policy: aiting on a sun king
By Edward Luce and Daniel Dombey
Published: March 30 2010 22:22 I Last updated: March 30 2010 22:22
For better or for worse, Washington has grown
used to the fact that PgIrack Obama runs the
most centralised — or ""White House-centric"" —
administration since Richard Nixon. When Nixon
wanted foreign policy advice, everyone knew
where he got it from: Henry 'Kissinger, variously
his national security adviser and secretary of
state.
In contrast, Mr Obama has no big foreign policy
strategist. Even insiders give different answers
when asked to whom he turns for advice on the
big international questions. But almost all agree
with the following observation. ""The truth is that
President Obama is his own Henry Kissinger —
no one else plays that role,"" says a senior official.
""Every administration reflects the personality of
the president. This president wants all the trains
Barack Obama at the Great Wall of China last year. Unlike his
predecessor Richard Nixon, who turned to Henry Kissinger for
advice, the US president has no big foreign policy strategist
routed through the Oval Office.""
Fifteen months after he took office, the character and structure of Mr Obama's foreign policy machinery is still evolving.
But from interviews with dozens of insiders and outsiders, including senior officials both authorised and unauthorised to
speak, and three former national security advisers, it is clear the buck not only stops with, but often floats for quite a long
time around, Mr Obama himself.
Foreigners have complained about the tendency of his domestic agenda to crowd out the international one — the passage
last week of healthcare reform was greeted with an audible sigh of relief among US allies. But within foreign policy itself,
his centralised structure can also result in many issues being left on the back burner awaiting presidential attention, say
critics.
""On the positive side, we have a very conscientious president who takes advice widely,"" says the official. ""On the debit
side, for all the president's intelligence, Barack Obama came to office with very little experience. He just doesn't have
much depth on some issues.'
The core of Mr Obama's foreign policy machinery is in the White House-based National Security Council, which advises
the president and co-ordinates activities across an increasingly complex alphabet soup of Washington departments,
military commands and intelligence agencies. The most widely questioned link in the chain is Jim Jones, whom, to many
people's surprise, Mr Obama brought in as his national security adviser.
Only briefly acquainted with Mr Obama beforehand, General Jones, a retired four-star marine corps general, shows little
interest in running the ""inter-agency"" process — a key part of the job. Somewhat unconventionally, Gen Jones travels
frequently and is thus often out of town. Unusually, it is Mr Obama himself who usually chairs the weekly National Security
Council, known as the ""principals meeting"", not Gen Jones.
Rahm Emanuel, Mr Obama's chief of staff, is also a key part of it. ""If you were to ask me who the real national security
adviser is, I would say there were three or four, of whom Rehm is one and of which Gen Jones is probably the least
important,"" says another official.
Anyone who has dealt with Gen Jones speaks highly of his matter-of-factness, his geniality and the respect many foreign
governments have for him — Pakistan and Israel among them. But as he himself admitted rather disarmingly last year, he
does not have a taste for bureaucracy. Speaking at the Atlantic Council, a think-tank where he previously worked, Gen
Jones provoked laughter when he said: ""I fondly remember [the Atlantic Council] as a place where people actually did
what you asked them to do. In my new role I'm finding out that an order is a basis for negotiation.""
The lack of a strong national security adviser has created recurring difficulties. Perhaps the best example is the Arab-
Israeli peace process, which Mr Obama launched on his second day in office when he appointed Geproe Mitphspil as his
envoy. Three months later, Mr Obama insisted Benjamin Netanyahu freeze all settlements activity in order to boost Arab
confidence in the talks.
In a heated ;34.16NA(dpyin the ,Clvg
li..0f7;ce. last May, in which Mr Netanyahu refused to accede to Mr Obama's demand, the
only officials present were Mr Emanuel and David Axelrod, senior adviser to Mr Obama in office and during the campaign.
Gen Jones was not there. The fallout put the talks in abeyance and damped high Arab hopes for Mr Obama.
""The question is, which bright spark advised the president to demand a settlements freeze without working out what the
next step should be when Netanyahu inevitably said 'No'?"" says Leslie Gelb, an official in the Carter administration and
former head of the Council on Foreign Relations. ""Why wasn't George Mitchell in the room? Where was Jones?""
Mr Obama's character is also stamped on the inter-agency process, set up and managed by Tom Donilon, deputy
national security adviser. The nitty-gritty of foreign policy-making is done at these frequent ""deputies' meetings"", which
can sometimes consume four to six hours a day.
Described by one insider as ""the most powerful man in the White House whose name isn't widely known"", Mr Donilon,
who was an official in the Clinton administration, is the man who keeps Mr Obama's trains running on time. And there are
a lot of trains. Last year, Mr Donilon held 270 deputies meetings — a workload described as ""clinically insane"" by a former
senior diplomat under Bill Clinton.
But as time goes on, it is becoming streamlined — now taking up roughly two to three hours a day, say officials. ""People
forget that we inherited two wars, terrorism threats, and perhaps the biggest single eight-year decline [George W. Bush's
two terms] in America's power and reputation in our history,"" says a senior official. ""It took time to put in place a process
that could deal with the very complex decisions we had to take.""
Also the organiser of Mr Obama's 9.30arn national security briefing, Mr Donilon reinstated the paper trails needed to
prevent intra-governmental anarchy, using the model devised by Brent Scowcroft, national security adviser to George
Bush senior and Gerald Ford. Vice-president Joe Biden's team was also incorporated to prevent the kind of ""parallel
process"" Dick Cheney used to circumvent the bureaucracy under George W. Bush.
""If you look for the 2002 or 2003 meeting where the decision to go to war in iraq was taken, you cannot find it,"" says the
senior official. ""By getting the process right, we are improving the quality of decisions.""
The deputies' ties go back years. For example, the families of Mr Don;Ion and Jim Steinberg, deputy secretary of state,
often go on holiday together. Mr Donilon's wife, Cathy Russell, is chief of staff to Jill Biden, the vice-president's wife. Mr
Steinberg's wife, Sherburne Abbott, is deputy to John Holdren, Mr Obama's chief scientific adviser.
All those who regularly attend, including Michele Flournoy, a senior Pentagon official, and Susan Rice, the US
ambassador to the United Nations, have known each other since at least 1993, when they started off in the Clinton
administration. This is just as well, since they spend half their lives together: ""A lot of work gets done in that group,"" says
Ms Flournoy. ""Sometimes it feels like shovelling coal to keep the fires going.""
The refurbished machinery was perhaps most in evidence during the build-up to Mr Obama's decision in December to
send another 30,000 US troops to Afghanistan — a journey that took four months and involved him in 40 hours of Oval
Office meetings.
But the very diligence of the process crowded out Mr Obama's time to focus on other crises — of which there are many.
""Time is the most precious commodity a president has,"" says a former national security adviser. ""On average he is only
going to have 45 minutes a day for foreign policy, so you want to make sure it is well spent.""
The widely expected departure of Gen Jones before the end of the year has also created rivalries within the engine room.
Those who are thought to have ambitions to replace him include Mr Steinberg, Ms Rice, Mr Donilon and Denis
McDonough, NSC chief of staff and the foreign policy official who is personally closest to Mr Obama. Although all are
widely respected, none is considered a big strategic thinker in the Kissinger or Scowcroft mould.
Described by Mr Gelb as Mr Obama's ""Lord High Executioner"", Mr McDonough ""has appended himself to the Chicago
crowd"", says another official. Mr McDonough's widely feared role highlights some of the contradictions of Mr Obama's
foreign policy apparatus.
Once an adviser to former Senate majority leader Tom Deschle, Mr McDonough was frequently at Mr Obama's side
during the campaign. Insiders describe him as the ""enforcer"" and as the keeper of ""message discipline"", a key element of
any campaign but something that can drastically slow the wheels of government.
""McDonough is the guy from the campaign and the one who plays basketball with the president — they're very close,"" says
an official. ""Instead of Jim Jones telling McDonough what the president thinks, it is the other way round.""
Indeed, if Mr Obama's highly centralised foreign policy machine had a face, it would be Mr McDonough's. ""Donilon has
been perceived to make the process inclusive and give everyone a seat at the table,"" says David Rothkopf, a former
Clinton official and scholar on the NSC. ""Fairly or not, McDonough has been perceived as representing a process that
was taking place in another room, among the inner circle, at a table to which most weren't invited.""
Mr Obama has built a machine in which all roads lead to and from him. On the minus side, that means a lot of lower-level
meetings without decisions. It also means neglecting issues that cannot be squeezed into his diary, such as trade policy,
which continues to drift; or relations with India, which are unnecessarily tense.
And it means that the fingerprints of Mr Obama's political inner circle are detected by the rumour mill even when they are
absent, such as on the president's decision to begin the rog,,g: witsirawal from anistan. in July 2011 — a
recommendation that came from Robert Gates, secretary of defence.
On the plus side. Mr Obama has a sharp learning curve, which means his administration continues to evolve. On the plus
side also, if it has to be White House-centric, it is perhaps better with him as the Sun King than, say, Nixon or George W.
Bush.
""At the end of each meeting, the president summarises what everyone has said and the arguments each has made with a
real lawyer's clarity,"" says a participant to the NSC principals meeting, which includes Mr Gates and Mrs Clinton. ""When
the president finally makes a decision, it is with the full facts and usually shows a high calibre of judgment.""
When Mr Obama makes a decision, that is.
STATE AND DEFENCE DEPARTMENTS
An 'alliance of the unsackables' finds it can confront the inner circle
If there is a caveat to the depiction of the Obama administration as White House-centric, it is in the
alliance between Hillary Clinton and Robert Gates, the president's secretaries of state and defence.
Mrs Clinton has proved one of the surprises of Barack Obama's tenure, forging a strong working
relationship with her former rival and establishing herself as his chief foreign policy spokesperson
internationally — if not at home, where Mr Obama's inner circle often seems to monopolise the explaining.
Mr Gates, who recently decided to stay for at least another year, is seen as unsackable, not least for the
credibility he lends on issues ranging from missile defence to Guantanamo Bay and Afghanistan. As a
holdover from the Bush administration, his national security bona fides are hard to dispute. It is no
coincidence that Mrs Clinton is probably the only other unsackable cabinet member.
The combination has made itself felt in some of the administration's most significant debates, notably on
Afghanistan, where both successfully urged the deployment of more troops.
""Gates and Clinton happen to like each other, which no one really predicted,"" says one official, who notes
that while the traditional role of the NSC is to ""play referee"" between the state and defence departments,
it is as often nowadays a combination of the two against the White House. This is very different from how
it worked when Donald Rumsfeld and Colin Powell held those positions.
""We work together well,"" Mr Gates said at an appearance with Mrs Clinton on CNN last year. ""I think it
starts with, frankly, based on my experience, the secretary of defence being willing to acknowledge that
the secretary of state is the principal spokesperson for United States foreign policy.""
Their outlooks often overlap. From the Pentagon, Mr Gates has long called for more US spending on
diplomacy. As chief diplomat, Mrs Clinton has adopted a muscular approach. On Iran, both favour tough
sanctions; on Russia, both have sought to reassure Moscow's neighbours even while improving relations
with the Kremlin.
But for all their workmanlike co-operation, there is no escaping the fact that Mrs Clinton is not part of the
Obama inner circle — a traditionally helpful feature in that job. There is also a constant ""residue of friction""
between Mr Obama's and Mrs Clinton's teams, according to insiders. For example, Cheryl Mills, Mrs
Clinton's chief of staff, has had several run-ins with others in the administration.
One official describes Mrs Clinton as ""totally loyal"" to Mr Obama. He adds: ""She and the president are not
the best of friends — how could they be? But she totally respects the presidency — she was married to a
president and she wanted to be one ... She still might be.""
Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2010. Print a single copy of this article for personal use. Contact us if you wish to
print more to distribute to others.
""FT"" and ""Financial Times"" are trademarks of the Financial Times. Privacy policy I Terms
© Copyright The Financial Times Ltd 2010."
4935,Fyi - Arturo making a renewed pitch for ecuador. We haven't discussed further yeti
4936,He landed and is home He will also be in the office for the entire day tomorrow. 202 419 1420. B6
4937,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, January 21, 2010 7:52 AM
H
Re: speech"
4939,"Importance: High
Loretta will be at speech."
4940,Not sure who will be there but here is possibility:
4941,We have a lot of people in meeting but we talked and will bring them to end of meeting so she can specially meet them.
4942,"After Afghan Shift, Top U.S. Civilians Face Tricky Future By MARK LANDLER WASHINGTON — As General David H.
Petraeus takes command in Afghanistan, the two top American civilian officials in the war face an uncertain and tricky
future, working with a newly empowered military leader, under the gaze of an impatient president who has put them on
notice that his fractious war council needs to pull together.Richard C. Holbrooke, the Obama administration's special
representative to the region, and Karl W. Eikenberry, the ambassador to Afghanistan, both hung on to their jobs in the
uproar that followed Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal's career-ending quotes in Rolling Stone magazine.But privately, at least
one senior White House official suggested using General McChrystal's exit as an excuse for a housecleaning, according to
senior officials. That was rejected as too disruptive during a military campaign that relies heavily on civilian support,
these people said.ln recent days, other administration officials have begun floating the idea that Ambassador Eikenberry
might be replaced by Ryan C. Crocker, the highly regarded former ambassador in Iraq who forged a close partnership
with General Petraeus during the successful Iraq troop increase. Such a prospect is viewed as remote, given Mr.
Crocker's prestigious new post at Texas A&M University. But the fact that his name is being invoked underlines the
challenges that confront Ambassador Eikenberry, as he adapts to a new partner — one who has strong ideas about how
soldiers and diplomats should work together in war. It also illustrates the remarkably powerful role that General
Petraeus will assume in the nine-year-old war, setting him up as almost a viceroy in Afghanistan and a key broker in
negotiations between President Hamid Karzai and Pakistan over an eventual political settlement.Before General
Petraeus's arrival, some critics said the White House had created a problem by recruiting several forceful, ambitious
personalities and giving them jobs with overlapping responsibilities. Administration officials acknowledge that, as one
said, ""there are obviously a number of substantial personalities on the team."" But the White House believes that the
current lineup can mesh, and that a difficult war demands this much talent. Still, the McChrystal blow-up has
reverberated through the State Department. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton instructed Ambassador
Eikenberry and Mr. Holbrooke to take a hard look at the civilian team, two officials said. She is not wedded to the
current lineup if it continues to bog down in internecine battles, they said.""You can't have a major shift in a civ-mil
structure without having the civilian side take a step back and look at everything,"" said a senior State Department
official, using the jargon for a civilian-military campaign.General Petraeus, whose appointment was approved 99-0 by
the Senate on Wednesday, took pains at his confirmation hearing on Tuesday to back a unified civilian and military
effort. He noted then that he had telephoned Mr. Holbrooke and would rendezvous with Ambassador Eikenberry in
Brussels, so the two could land in Kabul together.""Holbrooke has been my wingman, to a great degree,"" General
Petraeus said in an interview. ""We have had, and do have, a very good relationship."" That role, he said, will now fall to
Ambassador Eikenberry.Ambassador Eikenberry was highly critical of the Pentagon's proposal last year to send 60,000
additional troops to Afghanistan, which led to a difficult relationship with General McChrystal. But in fact General
Petraeus was the true architect of the plan.The ambassador, a retired lieutenant general and former commander in
Afghanistan, graduated from West Point in 1973, a year ahead of General Petraeus, but they did not know each other at
the academy. The two share a scholarly bent: General Petraeus holds a Ph.D. from Princeton, while Ambassador
Eikenberry has master's degrees from Harvard and Stanford.While they were never assigned together, their careers
intersected twice. In Iraq, General Eikenberry led an assessment of Iraqi security forces while General Petraeus was
commanding the 101st Airborne Division in Mosul. When General Eikenberry was commander in Afghanistan, General
Petraeus led an assessment of Afghan National Security Forces.General Petraeus declined to discuss personnel issues,
while Ambassador Eikenberry and Mr. Holbrooke turned down requests for an interview. Mr. Crocker, now the dean of
the George Bush School of Government at Texas A&M, did not return a call for comment. For Mr. Holbrooke, the new
landscape is challenging in other ways. Officials said his job security was less in doubt than it was six months ago, when
his ouster was the subject of Washington chatter. Yet he has arguably become a less central player: Jacob J. Lew, a
deputy secretary of state, manages much of the civilian influx in Afghanistan that Mr. Holbrooke helped shape, while the
embassy in Kabul is carrying it out. Mr. Holbrooke's current portfolio has played to his weaknesses, his own allies admit.
He is best as a high-level negotiator, and not as comfortable with the nitty-gritty work of helping Afghanistan build an
economy.These days, Mr. Holbrooke has become a globe-trotting diplomat, trying to retain flagging European allies
while seeking to draw influential Muslim countries like Egypt into helping Afghanistan. At a recent conference of 35
countries in Madrid, Mr. Holbrooke drummed up more support from allies for the Afghan government's campaign to
reintegrate Taliban fighters into mainstream society.Mr. Karzai's longer-term effort to reconcile with Taliban leaders,
and his negotiations with Pakistan, could propel Mr. Holbrooke back into a central role. Were these talks to become
more serious, several officials said, Mr. Holbrooke's negotiating skills could be put to use, as a broker and guardian of
American interests. For now, though, as evidence of General Petraeus's influence, he will do most of the shuttling
between Kabul and Islamabad, the Pakistani capital.On his last visit to the region, Mr. Holbrooke met with Mr. Karzai
and with senior Pakistani officials, including the army chief of staff, Ashfaq Parvez Kayani. Mr. Holbrooke's past run-ins
with Mr. Karzai, several officials said, have not hindered his ability to deal with the Afghan leader, and Pakistani officials
said they trusted him. Husain Haqqani, Pakistan's ambassador to Washington, said that Mr. Holbrooke took time to
understand Pakistan's concerns. ""Ambassador Holbrooke is liked by some, admired by others and seen as effective, even
by those who may not like him,"" Mr. Haqqani said.Still, General Petraeus is indisputably the key player, and he has
wasted no time asserting his control. On a secure videoconference call last Saturday, a person familiar with the call said,
General Petraeus threw his support behind a costly, and controversial, plan to install temporary generators to supply
more electricity to Kandahar, the Taliban stronghold that is the next major American military target.Mr. Holbrooke and
Ambassador Eikenberry swiftly assented."
4943,"This is the paper - see below.
cdm"
4944,"MS, when you ready, we have three calls that are pending from the last 60/90 minutes — Jones (unsecure), Cheryl and
Mullen (secure).
Jake recommends speaking to Cheryl first.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct) B6"
4945,fyi
4946,Fyi
4948,Yep
4949,"Pis raise Afghan women's participation in the London meeting. I'm looking at the draft document to come out of the
London conference and there's no mention of women. I'm working on a few suggestions and going to meet shortly with
one of Miliband's colleagues.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
4950,"MS, the crew is asking if you would like dinner soon — I wanted to check with you before they interrupted you in the cabin.
Lona Valmoro
S ecial Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
4953,"Greetings from Nairobi. I'm at the end of week-long trip to Kampala, Kinshasa and now Nairobi. The trip has been very
productive and I will fill you in on some of the discussions I have been having when I return. In the meantime, I know
that there are a number of discussions with Dan Benjamin and others relating to a new more aggressive approach to
CVE and I wanted to update you on my thoughts in terms of how those critical discussions fit in with our overall
approach to strategic communications around the globe.
As you and I have discussed, it is essential that we become much more pro-active in all our communications efforts. To
put it bluntly, we are in an ""information war"" on all fronts. With the proliferation of media outlets and opportunities
around the world, we must fight aggressively to get, and maintain, our fair share of ""consumer share of mind."" Both our
adversaries and allies recognize the importance of this aspect of foreign policy and are adopting new ways of
communicating with foreign publics. Consumers everywhere are constantly facing a barrage of information and in some
cases misinformation and dis-information. In order to get our messages across and confront the threats posed by our
adversaries, we must develop a new sense of urgency in all our communications efforts. Much has been said and written
about the concept of ""soldier diplomats"". In the same vein, I believe we must empower a corps of ""diplomat soldiers"" to
help us gain ground in this new war.
While countering violent extremism is, and will remain, a key objective of our communications efforts we must apply the
same level of determination with respect to all communications. We must both aggressively promote positive stories
about the US and rapidly respond to attacks against us. In the past, our failure to respond to attacks and distortions has
diminished our credibility and undermined our ability to combat our adversaries. For example, had we not responded to
all the rumors and innuendos surrounding our relief efforts in Haiti, I believe we would have provided a fertile field for
AQ and others to continue to perpetuate the image of the US as an ""invader"".
Before I left for this trip, I convened a meeting of our top PD officers and told them that we must become much more
aggressive in our strategic communications programs and initiatives. We plan to implement daily calls between our new
regional PD DAS's and PAO's in the regions so we can monitor on a daily basis all stories about the USG. We will work
with the Posts to ensure that they have strategies for dealing with stories as they develop. I would also like to request
that you send a cable to all Chiefs of Mission informing of the new strategy and reminding them of their responsibilities
in this critical area. We will work on a draft for your review when you return.
Finally, we are developing new organizational solutions, modeled on an approach I saw at our Mission in Uganda, which
I think will greatly clarify roles and responsibilities with respect to in country communications not only within the
Mission, but across all government agencies within particular countries.
I will continue to update you as we move forward.
Hope your trip is going well. Look forward to greeting together when we are both back in DC.
JM"
4954,fyi
4955,nice
4956,"At the foot of the master.
I learned.
cdm"
4957,"Fyi, a bit of Congressipnal outreach.
Jm"
4959,"FYI we are putting out the following statement.
STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
Bombing of the Shrine of Syed Ali Hujviri in Lahore
I was shocked and saddened by yesterday's attack on one of Pakistan's most popular places of worship, the Shrine of
Syed All Hujviri (Data Ganjbakhsh) in Lahore, which claimed the lives of many innocent Pakistanis.
The extremists have shown that they respect neither human dignity nor the fundamental religious values of Pakistani
society. Violating the sanctity of this revered shrine is a particularly sinister attempt to destabilize Pakistan and to
intimidate its people. The attackers will not succeed, as the Pakistani public refuses to be cowed by such violence.
We condemn this brutal crime and reaffirm our commitment to support the Pakistani people in their efforts to defend
their democracy from the violent extremists who seek to destroy it. Our thoughts and prayers are with the families of
the victims and with all the people of Pakistan.
###"
4960,FYI. I'm following up with Kurt to get his thoughts.
4962,"And also pls pass the salt
Thx"
4963,Froman has encouraged this call. I will also check in with Bader.
4964,"MS,
Your appointment is scheduled for 7:00am, and we are scheduled to depart the hotel at
8:30am. Monica and I will be ready by 6:00am for anything you need. Thank you!
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
4965,"I will be out of the office until Tuesday, July 6th on official travel with the Secretary. I will be checking my email during
this time. If you need immediate assistance, please call 202-647-9572. Thank you!"
4966,"Steve Mull is proposing that you do a conference call with the E3 FMs and Ashton sometime this week. Here is the
rationale and background:
The European Union Foreign Affairs Council, comprised of all 27 EU Foreign Ministers, will next meet on May 10. In a
conversation April 26, Bill Burns persuaded the E3 and European Commission to support adding to the agenda of that
meeting a discussion of preparations for the sanctions the EU will impose following passage of a UNSCR.
The European Council, comprised of the EU's heads of government, will meet on June 16-17 — a meeting which could
direct the imposition of such sanctions if we succeed in passing an UNSCR by then.
The purpose of your teleconference would be to hear from the E3 and Ashton a status report on the EU's preparations
to impose such sanctions, and to discuss how the U.S. could best support the EU's forward progress. It would
supplement experts' level consultations we have been conducting for several weeks, including meetings on May 3 and
May 6.
The measures the Europeans are considering include bans on new Iranian bank branches in the EU, correspondent
banking relationships, new investment in the Iranian energy sector, and on access for Iranian ships to European ports."
4967,On your schedule
4968,"Yes, it is on your line block for that day.
Lona Valmoro
S ecial Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
4969,fyi
4970,"H: Jim Fellows told me he was at your speech and thrilled by it. He's just returned from three years in China. He didn't
expect you would be so frank. Here's his post on The Atlantic website. Sid
http://jamesfallows.theatiantic.comiarchives/2010/01/a_momentous_40_hours.php#more
Xr
07:
Hi!!ary Clinton's ""Internet freedom speech iVian
A momentous 40 hours, leading to Clinton/China/Internet
21 Jan 2010 04:12 pm
Apart from two obvious pieces of momentous news in the past day-and-a-half -- the new junior Senator from
Massachusetts, and the new ckv V. V5-
rvi,-
,
,
c.:! (by which I mean today's lamentable, straight-party-line Supreme Court
ruline
;that removes limits from direct corporate underwriting of political campaigns) -- there is one other event today that
will have big ripple effects. i mean SecState Hillary Clinton's speech this morning about ""Internet Freedom,"" mentioned
;:lere and with a prelude discussion
I'm not going to take time for a thorough gloss of the speech. Instead I highly recommend reading the full text, lette, or
watching the official video, .'tere. And for now some of the main points while listening (and noting main points down in real
time with the handy '
uiveaSccibe, pen.)
- In contrast to the dreamy Internet optimism of a decade or so ago -- I'm not naming names, but I remember! -- when
many people imagined that info technology, by itself, would undermine oppression and bring the world together, Clinton
started off with a very astringent reminder that this technology, like others, was neither good or bad in itself and is already
being used in both helpful and destructive ways:
""Amid this unprecedented surge in connectivity, we must also recognize that these technologies are not
an unmitigated blessing. These tools are also being exploited to undermine human progress and political
rights. Just as steel can be used to build hospitals or machine guns, or nuclear power can either energize
a city or destroy it, modern information networks and the technologies they support can be harnessed for
good or for ill. The same networks that help organize movements for freedom also enable al-Qaida to
spew hatred and incite violence against the innocent. And technologies with the potential to open up
access to government and promote transparency can also be hijacked by governments to crush dissent
and deny human rights.""
And a very nice pivot out of this section, effective because it's so blunt and plain:
""On their own, new technologies do not take sides in the struggle for freedom and progress, but the
United States does.""
- Underscoring the ""this is a big deal"" tone of the speech, she enumerated the ""Four Freedoms"" that FDR proclaimed in
1941, as part of the struggle for the world's future, and said there were a comparable set of Four Freedoms for the
Internet age. Check out the speech yourself for details.
- The China surprise: the speech was a more frontal challenge to Chinese internet and overall censorship policy than I
expected, and than I recall in other US-China interactions in a very long time. For instance, early in the speech, an
itemization of the places where suppression is getting worse:
""In the last year, we've seen a spike in threats to the free flow of information. China, Tunisia, and
Uzbekistan have stepped up their censorship of the Internet. In Vietnam, access to popular social
networking sites has suddenly disappeared. And last Friday in Egypt, 30 bloggers and activists were
detained.""
Tunisia, Uzbekistan, Vietnam, Egypt -- this is not the grouping of countries that the Chinese government, in its recent
sense of rise to superpower status, is used to being lumped with. Compared to the US as a financial power, OK;
overtaking japan in economic size, yes; being a crucial player in environmental negotiations.., all that is one thing.
Bracketed in the same sentence with Tunisia and Uzbekistan is different. Sentences like this don't appear in formal, big-
deal SecState addresses by accident.
Other passages to the same effect:
""As I speak to you today, government censors somewhere are working furiously to erase my words from
the records of history. But history itself has already condemned these tactics....
""Those who disrupt the free flow of information in our society or any other pose a threat to our economy,
our government, and our civil society. Countries or individuals that engage in cyber attacks should face
consequences and international condemnation....""
And then the Google section itself.
I had wondered whether the speech would mention Google by name -- and had reason to think it might not. (Main
argument forleavina it implicit rather than referring directly to the Google case: in the company's ongoing efforts to find a
""il
lvineyiftaiv_in"" acceptable way to remain in China, rather than a lose-lose-lose permanent split, its not necessarily a help
to have the U.S. government standing officially by its side. ) But the way Sec. Clinton introduced the point was significant:
as a proxy for China's own ability to H.to,tentiai and sustain its economic rise:
""To use market terminology, a publicly listed company in Tunisia or Vietnam that operates in an
environment of censorship will always trade at a discount relative to an identical firm in a free society. If
corporate decision makers don't have access to global sources of news and information, investors will
have less confidence in their decisions over the long term. Countries that censor news and information
must recognize that from an economic standpoint, there is no distinction between censoring political
speech and commercial speech. If businesses in your nations are denied access to either type of
information, it will inevitably impact on growth.
""Increasingly, U.S. companies are making the issue of internet and information freedom a greater
consideration in their business decisions. I hope that their competitors and foreign governments will pay
close attention to this trend. The most recent situation involving Google has attracted a great deal of
interest. And we look to the Chinese authorities to conduct a thorough review of the cyber intrusions that
led Google to make its announcement. And we also look for that investigation and its results to be
transparent.
""The Internet has already been a source of tremendous progress in China, and it is fabulous. There are
so many people in China now online. But countries that restrict free access to information or violate the
basic rights of internet users risk walling themselves off from the progress of the next century. Now, the
United States and China have different views on this issue, and we intend to address those differences
candidly and consistently in the context of our positive, cooperative, and comprehensive relationship.""
There's a lot more in the speech, including about terrorism, disaster relief, religion, etc -- but it's there for the reading.
Back to the to-do list for me now.
Peirmalink
.Share This"
4971,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, January 21, 2010 11:23 PM
Valmoro, Lona J; Abedin, Huma
FW: Dartmouth
You are getting a memo on universities.
FYI on this from Jim Kim"
4973,"Huma Abedin
Friday, January 22, 2010 7:36 AM
H; 'ValmoroU@state.gov.
Re: Commencements
Yes we agree
Lona wanted to make sure you knew what was out there in case
are one or 2 we want: to discuss with u.
There"
4974,"Exactly -- in case you wanted to factor any into May/June planning.
Lona Valmoro
t to the Secretary of State
(direct) B6"
4975,"8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am WEEKLY MEETING w/REGIONAL BUREAU SECRETARIES
10:00 am Deputy Secretary's Conference Room
10:15 am MEETING w/S&ED TEAM
10:45 am Secretary's Outer Office
10:45 am STAFF MEETING
11:15am Secretary's Outer Office
11:15 am OFFICE TIME
12:00 pm Secretary's Office
12:00 pm BILATERAL w/MOLDOVAN PM VLADIMIR FILAT
12:30 pm Secretary's Conference Room *Official photo in East Hall preceding.
12:30 pm MCC SIGNING CEREMONY w/GOVERNMENT OF MOLDOVA
12:50 pm Benjamin Franklin Room, 8th Floor
1:00 pm MEETING w/HAITI TEAM
1:30 pm Secretary's Office
1:30pm OFFICE TIME
2:00pm Secretary's Office
2:00 pm REMARKS TO THE WHA CHIEFS OF MISSION CONFERENCE
2:30 pm George C. Marshall Conference Center
2:30 pm BILATERAL w/CANADIAN FM LAWRENCE CANNON
3:00 pm Secretary's Conference Room *Press avail following.
3:05 pm PRESS PRE-BRIEF
3:10 pm Secretary's Outer Office
3:15 pm JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/FM CANNON
3:35 pm Madison Room
4:00 pm MEETING w/UNESCO DIRECTOR-GENERAL IRINA BOKOVA
4:15 pm Secretary's Office *Official photo in anteroom preceding.
4:15pm MEETING w/MIKE FUCHS AND CHERYL MILLS
4:30pm Secretary's Office
4:30 pm OFFICE TIME
5:00 pm Secretary's Office
5:05 pm PRIVATE MEETING w/ SARA EHRMAN
5:15 pm Secretary's Office
5:20 pm DEPART State Department *En route Washington National Airport
5:40 pm ARRIVE Washington National Airport
6:00 pm DEPART Washington National Airport via US Airways Shuttle #2182
En route New York. NY
7:24 pm ARRIVE New York LaGuardia Airport
7:30 pm DEPART LaGuardia Airport
En route Private Residence
8:15 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
FYI:
4:00 pm SWEARING-1N CEREMONY FOR LESLIE ROWE, US AMBASSADOR TO MOZAMBIQUE Treaty Room
4:00 pm SWEARING-1N CEREMONY FOR RICK BARTON, REPRESENTATIVE OF THE U.S. ON THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL OF
THE UNITED NATIONS Benjamin Franklin Room"
4976,"They're still not as good as the DPRK at these barbs.
Amb Zhou saw Kurt and Jeff yesterday. Will download."
4977,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Friday, January 22, 2010 1:13 PM
H
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Lady Ashton
I just want to underline how valuable and important it is for you to be building the relationship with her that you are."
4978,"This is an AFP report from today.
Also, GTIP is working on a memo for you and Cheryl about child trafficking dangers in Haiti.
Trafficking fears as Haiti children go missing
Posted 5 hours 47 minutes ago
Updated 5 hours 46 minutes ago
Slideshow: Photo 1 of 2
The UN has warned countries not to step up adoptions from Haiti in the wake of the disaster. (AFP: Matthew
Marek
United Nations officials say children have gone missing from hospitals in Haiti since the devastating January 12
earthquake, raising fears of trafficking for adoption abroad.
""We have documented around 15 cases of children disappearing from hospitals and not with their own family at
the time,"" said UNICEF adviser Jean Luc Legrand.
""UNICEF has been working in Haiti for many years and we knew the problem with the trade of children in
Haiti that existed already beforehand.
""Unfortunately, many of these trade networks have links with the international adoption market.""
The agency said it had warned countries during the past week not to step up adoptions from Haiti in the
immediate wake of the quake.
However several are fast-tracking adoption procedures already under way, including Belgium, Canada, France,
Germany, the Netherlands, Spain and the United States.
Mr Legrand said the situation was similar to the aftermath of the tsunami in Asia five years ago.
Trafficking networks were springing into action immediately after the disaster and taking advantage of the
weakness of local authorities and relief coordination ""to kidnap children and get them out of the country"".
Rupert Colville, a spokesman for the office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, said child
enslavement and trafficking in Haiti was ""an existing problem and could easily emerge as a serious issue over
the coming weeks and months"".
The UN mission in Haiti has stepped up surveillance of roads, UNICEF officials said.
Mr Legrand said there was separate but only anecdotal evidence of people taking children by road to the
neighbouring Dominican Republic and loading children on to planes.
""We have seen over the past years many children being taken out of the country without any legal procedure,""
he said.
""This is going on. This is happening now. We are starting to have the first evidence of that, this is
unquestionable.""
He was unable to give details on the 15 missing children or their condition or clearly connect the anecdotal
observations in Haiti's chaos with trafficking.
The cases were documented by social workers and by partner non-governmental organisations working for
UNICEF in hospitals.
- AFP"
4979,"If you have the time or inclination, it would be really nice if you could send an email to Tom icah, or phone him. He went
for almost 100 hours without sleep to get the speech done, under unusually trying circumstances. He deserves some
recognition for grace under pressure and a job well done."
4981,"that many firms are owned by nations. Sid
http://blog.newsweelocom/blogs/thegaggle/archive/2010/01/22/should-foreign-corporations-spend-money-on-u-s-political-
candidates.aspx
Posted Friday, January 22, 2010 1:05 PM
Newsweek
Should Foreign Corporations Spend Money on U.S. Political Candidates?
Krista Gesaman
Foreign businesses might be the real winners in Citizens United v. Federal Elections Commission, the landmark case that
allows corporations and unions to spend limitless amounts of money on presidential and congressional political
campaigns. A majority of large businesses are now owned by foreign entities, and this means international corporations
could pour tons of money into the United States political scene, potentially swaying the political climate.
The biggest questions with this ruling is the scope of the term ""corporation,"" says Edward Foley, law professor at the Ohio
State University College of Law and director of the election-law program. Does the high court want this decision to apply
to foreign corporations as well as domestic ones, he ponders? The truth is, the court didn't make a decision one way or
the other.
Foley best explains the potential issues by talking about the electronic, video, and communication giant, Sony. The
corporation is headquartered in Japan, but a large number of its shareholders reside in the United States. In fact, people
can even buy and trade Sony's stock on the New York Stock Exchange. The issue is whether this corporation, with strong
ties to a foreign country and the United States, should be permitted to independently contribute money to presidential and
congressional campaigns.
The court sought to expand First Amendment protection for corporations, but did it really mean to promote the free flow of
ideas from Russian or Chinese corporations, Foley asks? Justice John Pau! Stevens focused on the same concerns in his
dissenting opinion. The majority's position ""would appear to afford the same protection to multinational corporations
controlled by foreigners as to individual Americans,"" he writes.
This afternoon, President Obama asked Congress to ""develop a forceful response"" to the ruling. But with Congress
juggling so many other important issues, it's unlikely that a change will be made in the immediate future. This could mean
that foreign cash could be supporting political candidates in next year's congressional midterm elections."
4982,"I am traveling overseas and only have sporadic access to my email. If you need immediate assistance, please call State
Department Operations at 202-647-1512 and ask for Nora Toiv who can assist you.
cdm"
4983,Great. Thanks. I know he will appreciate it.
4984,The little things go a long way. Thanks for being in touch with him.
4985,"You're very kind. The delivery was flawless and your idea to focus on the girl rescued from the rubble in Haiti wove it all
together. It was an honor to help out -- and I think we did some real good. Onward, onward...
Best,
Tomicah
Tomicah Tillemann, Ph.D.
Speechwriter
Policy Planning Staff
Department of State
S/P Main: 202.647.2372 I Direct: I Blackberry: urgent calls only)
Fax: 202.647.0844 I Room 7311 (S/P) I 2201 C Street NW I Washington, DC 20520"
4986,Thanks. Printing for her.
4987,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Friday, January 22, 2010 6:01 PM
FW: haiti comments"
4989,"FYI.
Still gathering info"
4990,"Matt passed along the following barebones intel from Lute and Samantha on
groping through the clark on this search):
(he made clear that everyone is
Will let you know if I learn more."
4991,"FYI:
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED January 22, 2010
NOTE FOR THE SECRETARY
FROM: G/TIP — Luis CdeBaca
SUBJECT: Child Trafficking in Haiti
G/TIP is gravely concerned about the potential for human trafficking (TIP) in the wake of
the earthquake, both as a result of the displacement of the population and the influx of troops
and aid workers. Even before the earthquake, there were in Haiti up to 300,000 restaveks
(children given away or sold by their parents and enslaved as domestic servants), as well as
reports that members of MINUSTAH used trafficked women in prostitution. In the 2009 TIP
Report Haiti was classified as a Special Case country with governance so dysfunctional it could
not be ranked.
The initial disaster response is focusing on immediate needs of food, shelter, and medical
care, but has thus far not addressed TIP prevention and protection issues. While attention is
being paid to the problems of orphans and adoptees, TIP was not adequately addressed in the
UN's initial flash appeal, so it is unclear which agency in the international system has the lead
on the ground. UNICEF has the child protection lead, UNFPA leads prevention of sexual and
gender-based violence, and IOM is tasked with shelter and camp management. We will work to
remedy, in a subsequent appeal, the omission of TIP from the operational plan.
We are moving to redirect $1 million of program funds that G/TIP has on Hispaniola and to
reprogram an additional $550,000; we will work with PRM to identify other funding
possibilities. Working through existing grantees and other experienced NG0s, it is our
intention to help resuscitate police child protection brigades that already exist in Haiti, to
rebuild capacity of Haitian organizations that protect restaveks, to prevent traffickers in the
Dominican Republic from enslaving displaced Haitians on farms and in prostitution, and to
educate Haitian parents of the risks of giving their children away in this time of crisis. We will
consult with partner agencies to ensure that the U.S. presence does not contribute to
trafficking. It will be important for the Department's messaging to convey our commitment to
fighting human trafficking in both the immediate and long term.
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED"
4994,"All:
See below for appreciation for all your efforts — congrats and thanks.
Please pass along to whomever I missed.
cdm"
4995,FYI
4999,No problem
5000,"sbwhoeop
Saturday, January 23, 2010 9:26 AM
H: FYI: Any foreign nation or leader with a front company becomes a ""person"" under US
law. S
http://coloradoindependent.com/46462/hugo-chavezs-state-owned-petroleos-corp-set-to-spend-on-your-u-s-election
F
&.1
3.1 4.1)
sr—c""
....e.-swadursooarssustre.tammzionewsmsostor,extuurs-xuAtias.
to .send on your
(in- mined Paerr-lee-- Corn
10101W1194901.1.1.11211...T.M.17,..
. aflgrnit,cnZfl,,,Z010
ti 4
491. 2 sea, r,%
(1,.A
'62 39 • M `4.1P, ‘s.3,Az-Ad:3'4
2:=111
.
. .1”....AILIONIMINSUlt S=WIMOlt.11111111111 2111011=1.19.711
,111221.VOMISSGMAIM1.1.7.1.111M.MVO.Itr...421/1.97.71r.11,111012.1.0
1:4;43y John Tornasic 1/22/10 3:58 PM
Blogging on the Citizens United Supreme Court ruling is more of what we love about the web. It's the kind of typical
collective dissection we have now come to expect but that never really existed before: serious, speculative, arcane, funny,
brilliant, baked, etc. The Sunliaht Foundation b!000inci is predictably good. Paul Blumenthal dips into the multinational
dimension of the new ""corporation as full citizen-person"" framework, drawing on blogging going on at Neytsweqk and the
CerAer for Pubiic inte'r'.
""Looks like [the Court] might support allowing foreign companies to spend freely in elections in the United States. I guess
this would be the corporate globalization of the U.S. electoral system."" So you gotta ask yourself: Who does Hugo Chavez
want for President?
Blumenthal excerpting the Center for Public Integrity:
The Center for Public Integrity looks at this closer and shows what kind of foreign influence we are
looking at:
One prominent examples is CITGO Petroleum Company — once the American-born
Cities Services Company, but purchased in 1990 by the Venezuelan government-owned
Petroieos de Venezuela S.A. The Citizens United ruling could conceivably allow
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, who has sharply criticized both of the past two U.S.
presidents, to spend government funds to defeat an American political candidate, just by
having CITGO buy TV ads bashing his target.
And it's not just Chavez. The Saudi government owns Houston's Saudi Refining
Company and half of Motive Enterprises. Lenovo, which bought IBM's PC assets in 2004,
is partially owned by the Chinese government's Chinese Academy of Sciences. And
Singapore's APL Limited operates several U.S. port operations. A weakening of the limit
on corporate giving could mean China, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, and any other country
that owns companies that operate in the U.S. could also have significant sway in
American electioneering.
I really can't see Americans being too happy about this.
ha Lithwick reported :rC(' .ate from the Supreme Court as the opinions were being read. She offered this aside:
While Stevens is reading the portion of his concurrence about the ""cautious view of corporate power"" held
by the framers, I see Justice Thomas chuckle softly.
Was it a disdainful chuckle at the impotence of his colleague? Was it merely a chuckle of disagreement, of good-natured
exasperation? Was it a chuckle at an anachronistic vision of the framers set beside today's modern corporate silicon and
steel behemoths? I doubt he was thinking about Hugo Chavez."
5001,"sbwhoeop
Saturday, January 23, 2010 9:30 AM
more...
Justice Ginsburg's questions in the Citizens United case to its attorneys focused on foreign owned corporations spending
in US elections. Ted Olson, attorney for CU. told her he opposed congressional restrictions on such spending."
5002,"I spoke with Arturo this morning about the delegation to Honduras.
They are proposing one of two alternatives: (1) Arturo, Jose F, Craig, and Dan R. or"
5003,Roger.
5004,Yes ops is reaching out to her soon.
5005,"You must read this -- a Chinese blogger said that the Internet speech ""was like a song to his heart."""
5006,"FYI: From one of the folks we hired who had been working with Pierre Louis:
Lessons from the Aceh and Nias Multi-Donor Trust Fund
1. The Government of Indonesia (G01) responded to the Tsunami by issuing a series of government decrees,
and immediately organized both overview and relief efforts to ensure a rational and coordinated
response. The first task was to produce a Damage and Loss Assessment (DLA). The DLA was followed by
a more detailed Master Plan for Rehabilitation and Reconstruction (MPRR). The MPRR provided in-depth
sector plans, spatial planning, the governance and supervision arrangements of finances with
considerable attention to how to avoid or minimize corruption. The process behind the MPRR was
consultative, with a wide range of local stakeholders and public offices being heard. The MPRR was
presented on 26 March, only 3 months after the Tsunami.
2. The MPRR was to form the basis for a general three-stage strategy. The Relief phase was originally set to
six months, but was then reduced to three: January- March 2005. The Rehabilitation phase is to run for
about 21 months, through December 2006, and the Reconstruction phase from July 2006 through
December 2009. The MPRR provides a well defined phasing of interventions.
3. The objectives for the Relief efforts were humanitarian relief: rescue; food and medicine; emergency
infrastructure and temporary shelter; and burying the dead. The Rehabilitation phase is to restore
services to minimum level: public services; economic facilities; banking and financial institutions; trauma
treatments; secure land rights; law and order; and temporary shelter. Finally, Reconstruction is to rebuild
the region: rebuilding the economy (production, trade and banking); the transportation,
telecommunications, and social and cultural systems; improving institutional capacity; and housing.
4. The Government set up a ministerial-level agency to manage the MPRR program from Aceh itself, the
Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Agency for Aceh and Nias. The BRR was formally established end April
2005 and became operational early May. The World Bank Board on 30 March 2005 formally established
the Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDF) with a Steering Committee comprised of BRR, GOI, donors and civil
society. Having a credible local coordinators was key to success.
5. The EC channels nearly 93% of its funds through the MDF, while only 2.5% of USD 400 million from the
US goes to the MDF. While payments into the fund were slow, disbursements out of it were to begin
with even slower. By October 2005, project agreements for about USD 200 million had been signed, but
only USD 3 million had actually been disbursed. Disbursements picked up the pace thereafter. The delay
was caused by two principal impediments: first, donors were quick to pledge funds, but getting all the
exact written agreements in place took time. This points to the need for donors to be flexible regarding
formal agreements, and accept simple, generic paragraphs that can contribute to speedy resolution of
slightly differing phrasings and concerns. Second, the processing time for project approval and
implementation was a concern. Since the MDF was to have funded projects on-budget, they had to be
implemented by government institutions. This crated bottlenecks.
6. Smaller donors joined because they wished to support the reconstruction efforts in Aceh but do not have
own capacity and often not strong views on how best to pursue this. They want the Bank to assume
fiduciary responsibilities for the funds in a high-risk environment, and also to take a lead in ensuring that
the funds go to prioritized activities. The MDF is thus seen a well-managed bank account with some paid-
for administrative services. However, the all-inclusive Steering Committee made membership large and
to some extent unwieldy, and forced it to discuss both policy and operational issues.
7. The Multi Donor Fund Secretariat has developed an Outreach Strategy that includes regular radio talk
shows, field visits to meet and discuss with beneficiaries and communication through advertisements as
well as a telephone hotline.
8. MDF received praise for engaging the Government of Indonesia (G01) in policy dialogue. The MDF is thus
an entry point for engaging on conditions for sustainability, relevance and impact.
9. Because the MDF does not accept strict ear marking of donor contributions — though it does allow for
preference indications — it means that the funds are freely available for programming according to the
criteria and priorities that the MDF agrees to. Given strong GOI participation, the MDF is seen as the
most successful instrument for harmonization and coordination in an environment that has been
criticized for a lack of coordination. The MDF's Mid Term Review conducted in 2008-2009 found that the
MDF had made a positive contribution to harmonizing donor efforts and to increasing the effectiveness
and efficiency of the reconstruction effort.
10. The MDF did not sufficiently engage the private sector and did not have a coherent job creation strategy.
The MDF lacked executive rights, but GOI and BRR are credited with leveraging a decisive response."
5008,"US law. S
This is from Justice Stevens' dissent in the Citizens United case:
If taken seriously, our colleagues' assumption that the identity of a speaker has no relevance to the Government's ability
to regulate political speech would lead to some remarkable conclusions. Such an assumption would have accorded the
propaganda broadcasts to our troops by ""Tokyo Rose"" during World War II the same protection as speech by Allied
commanders. More pertinently, it would appear to afford the same protection to multinational corporations controlled by
foreigners as to individual Americans: To do otherwise, after all, could "" 'enhance the relative voice' ""of some ( i.e. ,
humans) over others ( i.e. , nonhurnans). Ante, at 33 (quoting Buckley, 424 U. S., at 49). aUnder the majority's view, I
suppose it may be a First Arnendrnpnt problem that corporations are not permitted to vote, given that voting is, among
other things, a form of speech.
http://wvvw.law.cornell.edu/supct/htm1/08-205.ZX.htmi"
5009,"sbwhoeop B6
Saturday, January 23, 2010 4:09 PM
Re: H: FYI: Any foreign nation or leader with a front company becomes a ""person"" under
US law. S
Getting a legislative fix might be a gcod initiative for SOTU. Let the Republicans try to oppose it. S"
5010,"US law. S
Me, too. He shouldn't retire
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Slackberri
--"
5011,"US law. S
Some groups going for amendment but foreign corps may be low hanging fruit. Don't know, an idea to investigate Sent
via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
5012,"US law. S
You have people somewhere who can explore this Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
5013,"US law. S
See what harold koh says, just the foreign corp piece Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
5014,FYI
5015,FYI
5016,FYI
5017,The trust fund
5018,Services in Post-1[1].doc
5021,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Sunday, January 24, 2010 9:41 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
FW: from GOH - Montreal meeting talking points
See traffic at bottom which Bob Maguire (Haiti expert) sent to Leslie Voltaire (Haiti's rep to WJC Envoy office and UN)
who also forwarded to PM Bellerive.
cdm"
5022,"I don't believe so but Huma would have a better update than I would.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
5024,"Ruh-roh
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 24, 2010 11:25 AM
On the Ground Intelligence"
5025,"This document in text below is coming up the line to you as material for your trip. This is separate (but related) to what
we discussed earlier today. This focuses on the MDTF, using the tsunami model as a guide.
I also have tasked Jean-Louis to put together a think piece for this evening that we can look at re: the larger issue of
ensuring efficient, effective coordination of: bi-lateral donors investment, MDTF, and private fund/NGO efforts that all
must come together in a coherent fashion. Of not in this memo is fact that in tsunami, there was a GOI reconstruction
plan
See below on the Mu It-Donor Trust Fund
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED January 24,2010
INFORMATION MEMO FOR THE SECRETARY"
5028,fyi
5029,"Yes it is eikenberry, my automatic spell check make it eugenie!"
5030,HRC/WJC: Read below - worth the read
5032,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 24, 2010 12:05 PM
The Broader Donor Coordination and Accountability
His reference to our ppt was to the donor coordination mechanism"
5033,"He asked you about this when you sat down. The press hangs in the Andrews DV lounge and gets on the plane well
before you, the Air Force must have had Fox on when he was with us."
5034,"I don't know, people make big deals out of nothing, rather than subscribe to Occam's Razor
I have to look it up but I think you said you never noticed, probably because it's when you're not on the plane
I'll double check"
5035,FYI
5036,FYI
5037,Fyi
5038,"I am currently traveling. If you need immediate assistance, please contact Nora Toiv (ToivNF@state.gov) or Joanne
Laszczych, (Laszczychl@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
If it is an emergency after business hours, please reach out to our Operations Center to have them reach 'me.
Thank you
cdm"
5039,"Cc: Verveer, Melanne S
MS, we would like to do one photo at the plane with the local police as you are leaving if that's okay.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) (direct)"
5040,"Thank you for that I think it was his office rather than the Crown Prince himself who met your staff.
All is very well and the mobile phone project is really developing in a fantastic way can't wait for you to launch it in the
autumn
Cherie Blair"
5041,"NEA is asking for a statement from you on the sentencing of Syrian human rights activists. White House released a
statement on this. Draft below:
Statement by Secretary Clinton
Syrian Convictions of Human Rights Activists
The sentencing of Syrian lawyer Haitham Maleh to three years in prison is an example of Syria's failure to comply with
minimum international human rights standards. Convicting Maleh for exercising free speech and defending universal
human rights sends a clear message to the world that Syria does not tolerate peaceful forms of expression. We call on
the Syrian government to meet its responsibilities under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It
should demonstrate its commitment to international legal norms by releasing Maleh and other Syrian citizens, including
Muhannad al-Hassani and Ali Abdullah, who have been imprisoned solely for seeking to exercise their most fundamental
human rights.
###"
5042,Fyi - happy to give more context.
5043,"for having me join you for the trip. I can now add the Caucuses to the countries we've traveled to together!
You were magnificent. There is clearly much to be done in the region and I'll be following up from my end."
5045,FYI
5046,"1.4(B)
Barak
1.4(D)
B1
Slightly edited Background for Barak call:
On Gaza and the ""controlled items"" list, Israeli MFA Director General Yossi Gal and Ministry of Defense COGAT General
Eitan Dangot briefed Monday in Israel on a release of the new list, and newly announced international projects. (The
Declassify on: 07/05/2035"
5048,"sbwhoeop
Tuesday, July 6, 2010 7:54 AM
The Settlement Freeze That Never Was, And Never Will Be
http://maxblumenthal.com/2010/07/the-settlement-freeze-that-never-was-and-never-will-be/
The Settlement Freeze That Never Was, And Never Will Be
On 07.05.10, By Max Blumenthal
0
Linda Forsell's June 21 photos of ongoing construction in the Israeli settlement of Har Homa expose the illusion of
Netanyahu's settlement freeze
With the Israeli settlement moratorium scheduled to expire on September 26, the right-wing parties in Israel's coalition
government are exerting maximum pressure on Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to block the policy's renewal. ""Let's
get rid of the freeze and get back to building,"" declared Israeli Minister of Public Affairs and the Diaspora Yuli Edelstein on
Israel National Radio yesterday. ""It's our land anyway!"" (Edelstein lives in the settlement of Neve Daniel).
Back in the US, the former Israel lobbyist and ex-Clinton Assistant Secretary of State Martin Indyk took to the Washington
Post's op-ed page to praise Netanyahu and Barack Obama for ensuring that ""there were zero building starts in the West
Bank settlements.""
During the week of June 21, I traveled through the West Bank with Swedish photojournalist Linda Forsell to document
new settlement construction and the settlers' theft of water from Palestinian towns. Forsell took a series of photos at Har
Homa, a massive Israeli settlement towering over the Palestinian town of Beit Sarhour. Her photos show ongoing
construction of hundreds of new settlement units — documents of the settlement freeze sham.
0
Netanyahu authorized the building of new settlement units just days after he
announced the freeze in November 2009. He attempted to disguise new settlement construction by drawing a false
distinction between the West Bank and ""parts of Jerusalem"" like Har Homa that actually lie outside 1967 lines. As Israeli
government flack Mark Regev remarked in December 2009, ""We've made a clear distinction between the West Bank and
Jerusalem. Jerusalem is our capital and will stay as such."" With a few exceptions, Obama allowed this scheme to go
forward.
According to the Washington Post, Obama's meeting with Netanyahu this week will have more to do with reassuring
Jewish Democrats than with halting the wholesale colonization of the West Bank. As the Post's Anne Kornblut reported,
""The White House meeting will not dwell on some of the most difficult time-sensitive issues, including the expiration of a
moratorium on Israeli settlement construction in September."" This may mean an end to the settlement freeze, but it was
only an illusion after all."
5049,FYI
5050,"Delivery has failed to these recipients or distribution lists:
scwarzericpOstate.gov
The recipient's e-mail address was not found in the recipient's e-mail system. Microsoft Exchange will not try to redeliver
this message for you. Please check the e-mail address and try resending this message, or provide the following diagnostic
text to your system administrator.
Diagnostic information for administrators:
Generating server: MSWASHDCIB01.washdc.state.sbu
scwarzericp@state.gov
#< #5.1.1> #SMTP#
Original message headers:
Received: from vance2.state.gov ([10.4.16.249]) by
MSWASHDCIB01.washdc.state.sbu with Microsoft SMTPSVC(6.0.3790.3959); Sun, 24
Jan 2010 16:09:22 -0500
Received: from mail.clintonemail.com (ool-18bbeabb.static.optonline.net [24.187.234.187])
by vance2.state.gov with ESMTP id o00KfLRIA1013222;
Sun, 24 Jan 2010 15:41:21 -0500
Received: from CLNTINET08.clinton.local ([fe80::dObb:23d3:f75e:4993]) by
CLNTINET08.clinton.locai ([fe80::dObb:23d3:f75e:4993%10]) with mapi; Sun, 24
Jan 2010 16:09:21 -0500"
5051,"MISSING
FYI traffic."
5052,"Can be done whenever you are back. His office knows you are running just a few minutes late.
Lauren"
5053,I will follow up on this today.
5054,SchwartzEP@state.gov
5056,"It's actually not too far past Richmond/Lynchburg so a late afternoon/evening trip is realistic. We can discuss tomorrow
and give you a recommendation.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
5057,"Madam Secretary,
Jake mentioned that you asked for more information about a proposal made in 2005 for a global CT organization, and he
asked me to find out a little about it. Below is some brief information on the proposal, which was made by Saudi Arabia:
The proposal made by the then crown prince (now king) in Feb. 2005 called for the establishment of an international
counterterrorism center ""under the auspices of the UN."" The purpose of the organization would be to, among other
things, ""develop a mechanism for exchanging information and expertise between States"" on a wide range of non-
military counterterrorism issues, encourage the establishment of national and regional centers, and provide assistance
to developing countries to deal with crises and terrorist acts. The center, as conceived in 2005, would also allow national
counterterrorism coordinators from different countries and regions to meet and share information and experiences.
This proposal was endorsed by the OIC (and OIC countries reaffirm their support for the center each year at the UNGA),
but has never received any serious consideration within the UN by non-OIC members. The Saudis continue to be
interested in implementing the proposal. Most significantly, recently there have been discussions between the UN and
Saudis as to how their proposal could be married with efforts to enhance the UN's capacity to support implementation
of the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy by allowing the UN Counter-Terrorism Task Force (CTITF) Office and the
different CTITF member entities to engage more actively and directly with CT experts/practitioners in capitals and have
multilateral CT consultations wherever necessary.
But S/CT mentioned that, if we were to move forward
on S/CT's CFO idea, we would hope to work closely with the Saudis.
Please let me know if you would like any further info.
Thanks,
Mike
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
(cell)"
5058,"Strobe talbott returned your call through ops. Also, colombian president uribe has put in a request to speak with you.
He would like to thank you for your public statements on the free trade agreement."
5059,"MS, the Spanish FM just called through Ops -- he is boarding a plane from Cuba in about 30-40 minutes and would like to
speak with you as soon as possible. Would you like Ops to connect the call to the residence or wait until tomorrow?
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct) B6"
5060,Ok
5062,"Yes, doing now.
Lona Valmoro
S ecial Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
5063,"Are the Mideast Policy Team!
by Leslie H. Gelb
July 7, 2010 I 2:38pm
I ri==IPresident Barack Obama meets with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in the Oval
Office of the White House, July 6, 2010. (Gary Fabiano / Sipa Press) Obama's bow to Netanyahu was
just the latest in a series of disastrous missteps in U.S. policy toward Israel. Leslie H. Gelb on who's to
blame—and how the White House can get back on course.
Whoever advised President Obama to flay Israel publicly until this week should be fired. Only advisers with no experience
in dealing with Israel could have believed that Israeli leaders like Prime Minister Netanyahu would bow to public attacks.
And whoever advised Mr. Obama to kneel rhetorically to Mr. Netanyahu in public on Tuesday should also be fired. The
only thing accomplished by this embarrassing tactic was to put Israel in a position to call the shots on Mideast policy for
the rest of Obama's first term.
The real enemy of a negotiated settlement in the Mideast is not time; it's failure.
Were the culprits the non-foreign policy White House intimates — chief of staff Rahm Emanuel and political honcho David
Axelrod? Axelrod knows nothing about this, and worse, Emanuel thinks he does because he lived in Israel. Was George
Mitchell, the president's Mideast negotiator, the brains behind the foolishness? Surely, he's had enough experience
working with Israelis to know better. Did General James Jones, the National Security Adviser, remain silent, again? And of
course, where was Secretary of State Hillary Clinton? Strangely for someone so adept at pleasing Israel's constituents in
America, she spent a lot of time this past year publicly beating up on Israeli leaders. Has she been led astray by the pro-
Arab contingent of the State Department?
•Martin Indyk: New Hope for Mideast Peace
•Peter Beinart: Netanyahu's Latest Insult Or is the guilty party none other than President Obama himself? The more we
find out about who makes decisions in the White House on every subject from nuclear weapons to coloring of Easter
eggs, it turns out to be the man in the Oval Office himself. He's the expert. He's the decider. He invites everyone to state
his or her piece or peace, then he tells them what to do — and seemingly without question, they do his bidding.
Mr. Obama started his White House tenure from a near-zero base of foreign policy knowledge and no experience in the
Middle East. It was easy enough to guess this blissful state from his earliest decisions. He came out of the box demanding
that Israel agree to suspend construction on the West Bank as a precondition for direct negotiations with the Palestinians.
Anyone who knew anything about this situation surely would have told the president that the chances of Mr. Netanyahu
agreeing to this ""proposal"" were zero, or minus zero. No Israeli leader, even a dovish one, would ever dream of beginning
negotiations by conceding his major bargaining card. As the teenagers say, what were Obama and his advisers thinking?
And yes, after the Israelis publicly humiliated Vice President Biden during his trip to the Holy Land by announcing they
would start new construction in East Jerusalem, Washington had to respond vehemently. The Israelis had been arrogant
and stupid on this one. They had weakened American power in the region. No U.S. president could let them get away with
it. Clinton and others made strong public statements of criticism, and those were fine. But Mr. Obama then allowed Mr.
Netanyahu to come ahead with his planned visit to D.C. — and publicly humiliated him. The U.S. president let the Israeli
prime minister cool his heels for hours before meeting with him, then wouldn't shake his hand when he departed. There's
no surer way to unite a nation behind its leader, even a controversial one like Netanyahu, than to have a foreign leader
humiliate him.
This brilliant tactic — thought of by Obama's advisers or the president himself — accomplished two things. It stiffened Israeli
backs even further against being conciliatory about starting talks with the Palestinians. The Israeli government was not
about to cave to American pressures. It also galvanized Israeli supporters in the United States — in particular within
conservative parts of the Jewish community and the Republican Party. There went Mr. Obama's support for pressing
Israel even in private.
To top this all off with Tuesday's meeting, full of smiles and the adoption of Israeli-desired language on almost every topic,
only made matters worse. It made the situation look as if the American president had been cowed by Jewish control of
. .
American politics. That certainly pleased American and Israeli hawks, but it did not please others who want to see
genuine progress in Mideast talks.
There is a time and place for Washington to put pressure on Israel. Mr. Obama and his team picked every wrong time and
place. The right occasion to squeeze is when the negotiations have reached the point where both sides have given and
where both must give more to close the deal. Only at that point does pressure make sense. All parties would get a real
shot at peace in return for their concessions.
To be sure, many ask at this point — How do you get to that point? The answer is not to browbeat the parties to scurry to
the negotiating table. That tactic simply never pays off. The answer is to build conditions beyond the negotiating table,
conditions in the political community in both Israel and Palestine, that would support compromises at the table. The British'
pushed the Catholics and Protestants to make concessions year after year, only to fail time and again, only to further
inflame feelings all around and spur greater violence. Finally, London focused on getting Protestant and Catholic women
to form common groups to support compromise. London did as much with various business communities that evolved into
backers of mutual concessions as well. Only then did parties know that they had support for compromises, their
negotiations got somewhere, and they reached agreement. That's what needs to be done between Israel and the
Palestinians.
We hear time and again that the enemy of peace in the Middle East is time, and that time is running out. Perhaps that is
what has caused Mr. Obama and his team to misstep so badly; they think it's a race against the clock. Do something now
or fail. But the real enemy of a negotiated settlement in the Mideast is not time; it's failure. Neither Israel nor the
Palestinians nor the United States can afford to fail again. After yet another failure, it could well result in perpetual
violence.
To set his Arab-Israeli policy on a sensible course, Mr. Obama needs to search for new advisors who know how to get
things done in the Middle East, hire them, and listen to them.
Leslie H. Gelb, a former New York Times columnist and senior government official, is author of Power Rules: How
Common Sense Can Rescue American Foreign Policy (HarperCollins 2009), a book that shows how to think about and
use power in the 21st century. He is president emeritus of the Council on Foreign Relations.
Get a head start with the Morning Scoop email. It's your Cheat Sheet with must reads from across the Web. Get it.
For inquiries, please contact The Daily Beast at editorialthedailvbeast.com.
RL: http://www.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2010-07-07/obama-gets-more-bad-advice-on-israel-leslie-gelb/p/"
5064,Yes. 111 have them for you before you leave State in the morning.
5065,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, January 24, 2010 8:30 PM
H
cell. Funeral tomorrow. B6"
5066,"HRC
Attached and below is a concept note for how the donor coordination and leadership for Haiti's reconstruction could be
established, with key being, given Haitian's critical voice. It is modeled after tsunami entity that was created by GOI.
(Doug/Justin — can you get to WJC this evening?)
The assumptions underpinning this approach are at the bottom of the email.
cdm"
5067,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.goy>
Sunday, January 24, 2010 9:40 PM
FW: Doctors report from Haiti
Depressing
See not only Mike's email — really see the incoming one.
cdm"
5068,FYI
5069,"She will be around/reachable the rest of the evening.
Ops also has her phone number on file.
1###"
5070,fyi
5071,Think I may have sent this but interesting insights and overlapping ones.
5072,"They were very grateful. Thanks.
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
5073,mcgovern
5074,"Agree - it we also have folks who need hosp care for a period; there are several things like this we should consider Sent
via BlackBerry by AT&T"
5075,"Lowey
FYI."
5076,"8:10 am ARRIVE State Department
8:15 am BILATERAL w/ITALIAN FOREIGN MINISTER FRANCO FRATTINI
8:45 am Secretary's Conference Room *Official photo in East Hall preceding.
8:45 am PRESS PRE-BRIEF
8:50 am Secretary's Office
8:50 am JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/ITALIAN FM FRANCO FRATTINI
9:00 am Treaty Room
9:00 am DEPART State Department *En route Andrews AFB
9:25 am ARRIVE Andrews AFB
9:30 am DEPART Andrews Air Force Base via Air Force Aircraft Tail #
9:45 am SECURE PHONE CALL WI GEORGE MITCHELL
10:55 am ARRIVE Montreal-Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport
11:00am DEPART Montreal-Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport
En route International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
11:35 am ARRIVE ICAO
11:45 am WORKING SESSION PART II: ""TRANSITION FROM HUMANITARIAN 12:05 pm NEEDS TO LONGER TERM STRATEGIC
VISION"" ICAO Council Chamber
12:15 pm MEETING w/CANADIAN PRIME MINISTER HARPER
12:45 pm Meeting Room, 3r1 Floor *Camera Spray at top
12:50 pm FAMILY PHOTO w/CONFERENCE PARTICIPANTS
12:55 pm Delegates' Lounge
1:00 pm SESSION: ""RECONSTRUCTION AND BEYOND: A VISION FOR THE
3:15 pm NEW HAITI"" ICAO Council Chamber *Camera Spray at top.
3:30 pm JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/FM CANNON, PM BELLERIVE,
4:00 pm AND OTHERS TBD
4:15 pm MEDIA INTERVIEW TBD
4:40 pm Media Room Tbd
4:50 pm DEPART ICAO *En route Montreal-Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport
5:25 pm ARRIVE Montreal-Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport
5:30 pm DEPART Montreal-Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport via Air Force Aircraft Tail
7:00pm ARRIVE Andrews Air Force Base
7:10 pm DEPART Andrews Air Force Base *En route Private Residence
7:30 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5077,"Hillary,
I would like to share the outcome of the meeting I had with Netanyahu today. I need some guidance from you urgently
and before I talk to SG (at Netanyahu's short fuse request).
I am reachable through Ops.
Many thanks,
Susan"
5078,"Yes! A great trip.
On Thu, Jul 8, 2010 at 9:02 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:"
5079,"Below and attached is a proposed draft for a speech next Thursday at CFR. You'll recall that we discussed this with you
at the last speech meeting. The idea is to give a speech one year after your last CFR address that updates and amplifies
the frame you outlined, and fills it in with the work of the past year. The speech will also underscore the continuity
between your speech and the National Security Strategy.
The below draft still needs a good bit of work, but we have between now and next Thursday to get it into shape. AMS
was initially skeptical, but I think she believes the speech is heading in the right direction (she'll write you with specific
comments ... I have my own suggestions for further improvement) and that on balance it should be given. Derek is a
strong proponent of the speech, and Jim, who has not read a draft, embraced the concept.
***DRAFT***
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON REMARKS AT COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS WASHINGTON, DC
JULY 15, 2010
B5
B5
B5
B5
B
-
Thank you.
###"
5080,Are you up for that given your other demands?
5082,Ok
5083,"Tim Rieser said today our allocation in the Senate for FY11 is $2.6 billion below our request. Haven't seen a
break out of the numbers yet, but that is far better than how the House treated us. We are expecting the
Senate to mark-up State/Foreign ops on July 22nd."
5084,"You have many better things to think about this Friday night, and I hope
my 2 cents on the speech.
But let me add
Best,
AM"
5085,FYI. We are revising call sheet for call to Karzai - potentially Sunday.
5086,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, July 10, 2010 3:24 PM
Re: Your Phone Call to President Karzai
1.4(D)
B1
Pakistanis will go to Kabul just before the conference to try to bring it home. Checking with Holbrooke to see what is
necessary on Pakistani side."
5087,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, July 11, 2010 10:06 AM
H: fyi, leaked Luntz poll on Bibi policies; and many congrats to Huma! Sid
Below is a transcript from Israeli TV News Channel Ten on a leaked poll taken last week by Frank Luntz. Here's a
summary:
1. 56% of Americans agree with the claim that there is a humanitarian crisis in Gaza;
2. 43% of Americans agree with the claim that people in Gaza are starving;
3. 34% of Americans support the Israeli operation against the Flotilla;
4. 20% of Americans ""felt support"" for Israel following announcement of easing of Gaza closure.
Frank Luntz analyses Netanyahu's media performance in the flotilla affair
The figures are troubling and worrisome. If that is the situation with our great friend the US, it is easy to imagine the
situation in other, somewhat less sympathetic countries.
Channel Ten TV News, July 1 2010 20:38
Yaacov Eilon (host): Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is considered to make an extremely persuasive presentation in
the world press. But a professional analysis by a US expert presented yesterday to his senior aides strongly criticizes him.
Netanyahu's messages on the flotilla caused more harm than good. Our political correspondent Chico Menashe has
obtained the report.
Chico Menashe: Criticism of Prime Minister Netanyahu's current PR messages and Israeli PR in general comes from the
international elite of media consultants and pollsters and from the mouth of Frank Luntz, considered one of the leading
American political consultants, a Republican pollster, a consultant to many governments throughout the world and to
dozens of the biggest corporations in the US. He was asked by the Jewish organization The Israel Project to check the
opinions of the American public on the messages Israel issued to the world during and after the flotilla events. The result
is a harsh document that primarily criticizes the media strategy of the person considered Israel's number one
propagandist in the world, Prime Minister Netanyahu.
Netanyahu: Once again Israel faces hypocrisy and a biased rush to judgment.
Chico Menashe: Every time Israeli speakers begin with accusing the international community, writes Luntz, they
lose their audience. For example, Netanyahu's comments after the flotilla about the world hypocrisy were rejected by
most of the American participants who listened to them. The findings were presented last night to senior members of
Netanyahu's Bureau. Luntz checked the opinions with focus groups, not a poll. He warns of a dangerous slide in the
public opinion of the only country considered pro-Israeli, the U.S. Israel misses simple opportunities to change world
public opinion, he writes, and the consequences are significant. The American public increasingly hesitates to accept
arguments that support Israeli positions.
Ehud Barak: There is no hunger in Gaza and no humanitarian crisis.
Netanyahu: There's no shortage of food, there's no shortage of medicine, there's no shortage of other goods.
Chico Menashe: Luntz says Israel must immediately stop using the argument that there is no hunger and no
humanitarian crisis in Gaza. He says this fatally destroys Israel's credibility in light of the images on the
television screens. Israel must admit that there is a problem, he says, to gain the listeners' sympathy [emphasis
mine]. Luntz finds the troubling figure that 56% of participants agree with the claim that there is a humanitarian crisis in
Gaza, and no less astonishing is that 43% of participants from the American public agree with the claim that people in
Gaza are starving. But even lifting the closure that was supposed to improve Israel's image missed the opportunity,
according to Luntz.
Netanyahu: Yesterday an important decision was made by the security cabinet. Its meaning is clear. On the one hand,
allowing civilian goods into Gaza, and on the other hand maintaining the military blockade of Hamas.
Chico Menashe: The statement by Netanyahu's bureau of lifting the closure missed the opportunity to gain
support in international public opinion [emphasis mine]. Only 20% of the Americans polled felt support of Israel
following the statement. According to Lunt, this is the summary of the flotilla damage in American public opinion: Only
34% of the American public support the Israeli operation against the flotilla, and he says that is a dangerously low
percentage."
5088,"Ms: dep. steinberg has put in a request through ops to speak with you. He says it can be unsecure.
###"
5089,Fyi - we are putting out the following today.
5090,"Ms:
I apologize if this email is duplicating anyone else's efforts (we are trying to leave huma alone today!) Jake has put forth
a recommendation for you to call karzai today, and also for you to speak with holbrooke in advance of that call. There is
an updated call sheet which has been faxed to your residence in chappaqua, and should be there now.
Let me know if I can help in any other way.
###"
5091,FYI
5092,"The gentleman you have talked to Bill Burns about has apparently gone to his country's interests section because he is
unhappy with how much time it has taken to facilitate his departure. This could lead to problematic news stories in the
next 24 hours. Will keep you posted."
5096,B6
5097,"http://www.bloomberq.com/news/2010-07-14/americans-disappoving-of-obama-policies-poised-to-enable-republican-
dains.html
Americans Disapproving Obama Poised to Enable
Republican Gains
By John McCormick and Catherine Dodge - Jul 14, 2010
•
• Email
• Share
• Print
Chart: Poll Results
Attachment: Poll results and methodology
Americans disapprove of U.S. President Barack Obama's handling of almost every major issue and are
deeply pessimistic about the nation's direction, offering a bullish environment for Republicans in the
November congressional elections.
A majority or plurality disapproves of Obama's management of the economy, health care, the budget
deficit, the overhaul of financial market regulations and the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, according to a
Bloomberg National Poll conducted July 9- 12. In addition, almost 6 in 10 respondents say the war in
Afghanistan is a lost cause.
Almost two-thirds say they feel the nation is headed in the wrong direction, an even more sour
assessment than in March when 58 percent felt that way. Two-thirds of independent voters are
pessimistic, while just 56 percent of Democrats offer a vote of confidence.
""They don't see any solutions in sight,"" said J. Ann Selzer, president of Selzer & Co., a Des Moines, Iowa-
based firm that conducted the nationwide survey. ""They have been hammered by the economy and there
is a disconnect between the lives Americans are living and Washington. They seem to have lost hope.""
Poll respondents are divided on their congressional preference between Democrats and Republicans,
with both sides getting 43 percent support. Among those who say they are most likely to vote,
Republicans are favored, 48 percent to 40 percent. The Republican advantage is even greater among
likely voters who view the election as exceptionally important, with Republicans beating Democrats 56
percent to 34 percent.
Control of Congress
For the Democrats, whd control Congress and the White House, the survey shows the potential 'for losses
in November, when voters will fill all 435 House seats, 36 Senate seats and 37 governorships. The
outcome could affect °Pam's ability to move his agenda through Congress for the two years leading up
to his own 2012 re-election bid.
The fate of incumbents will depend to some extent on what happens to the economy in the next four
months and whether unemployment drops much from its current 9.5 percent. A rising stock market could
help as well. So far this year, the S&P 500 stock index has declined 1.8 percent.
The public's disenchantment with the president's Policies doesn't extend to voter feelings about Obama
himself, as he gets a job approval rating of 52 percent and personally is viewed favorably by 55 percent.
Obama, 48, remains more popular than any of the Republican figures tested in the poll and is topped only
by Secretary of State :-- ;:!aity ant.cn and General Da,,,td Petraeos, the new commander of U.S. forces in
Afghanistan, among a list of 15 people and political parties reviewed.
Republican Leaders
The only bright spot for Republican candidates is for Louisiana Governor Eiob%) 1i:tele!, who gets a 32
percent favorable rating and an 18 percent unfavorable grade. Better-known party leaders such as former
vice presidential candidate :a-et..n and former House Speaker Netf,ri: CirigPait both have negative
ratings that outweigh the positive views.
Although turnout in midterm elections is historically lower than in presidential races, the electorate is
interested. Four- fifths of Americans who plan to vote say November's election is very or exceptionally
important.
The likelihood to vote is strongest among older voters, Republicans and those with the highest incomes.
Among those 55 and older. three-quarters say they will definitely vote, compared with 48 percent of those
younger than 35. Four-fifths of Republicans say they will definitely vote, compared with 65 percent of
Democrats and 62 percent of independents.
Referendum on °barna
Seeking to capitalize on the intensity expressed by voters, Republicans want to make the election a
national referendum on Obama and the party in power, while the White House and Democrats argue it is
about going forward, rather than backward to failed policies.
The challenge for Democrats will be to translate their vision of a better future into more positive feelings
about the economy among voters. In the poll, Republicans have the advantage among the independents
often critical to winning elections. Among independents likely to vote, Republican congressional
candidates are preferred to Democrats, 50 percent to 29 percent.
""Anything that has been tried hasn't resulted in making anything better in the world where ordinary people
live,"" Selzer said. ""That's a bad scenario for incumbents of the majority party.""
Incumbent Disadvantage
A third of poll participants say they would be less likely to vote for a candidate who has served in
Congress for many years. About one-fifth of likely voters say the election is more about sending a
message, while three-quarters say it is about picking the party that has the best ideas.
""I don't know what these people are thinking in Washington,"" says poll respondent Jeff Lockman, 41, a
professional golfer and Republican from Malvern, Pennsylvania. ""They are going in 10 different directions
and they really don't know what to focus on.""
The proportion who feel the nation is headed in the wrong direction is about the same as at this poin't in
1994, when Republicans took control of Congress, and 2006, when Democrats took over.
The public also has soured on Obama's foreign-policy priority, the war in Afghanistan. While the president
has ordered an expansion of forces to turn the tide in a conflict where he says the U.S. has a critical stake,
58 percent say it is a lost cause, compared with 36 percent who say it can still be won. A slim majority of
Republicans -- 52 percent -- say the U.S. can still win in Afghanistan, while 71 percent of Democrats say
the conflict is lost.
Afghanistan Withdrawal
Six in 10 Americans say it would be best to stick with Obarna's plan to start withdrawing forces in July
2011, while one-third say they remain open to keeping the same number of troops there, or even adding
additional forces.
Reflecting the belief among many that the war cannot be won, a third of Americans say they have become
less supportive of the effort there in recent months.
The Bloomberg National Poll is based on interviews with 1,004 U.S. adults ages 18 or older. Percentages
based on the full sample may have a maximum margin of error of plus or minus 3.1 percentage points.
:4:?,r;yr• '.
3cwrra:1, who studies public opinion at the ,A;-necicar Entarpr:F.:e institute, a public-policy research
group in Washington, cails the poll ""very, very grim news for the Democrats.""
At the same time, she says, one silver lining for Democrats is that Republicans have yet to convince
voters that they have a plan.
Obarna Visit
One signpost for Democrats in the poll is the finding that just 26 percent of Americans say it would help a
Democratic candidate in their area to get a visit from Obama, while 20 percent say it would hurt the
candidate and 54 percent say it wouldn't matter or they don't know.
Obama's worst ratings are for his handling of the budget deficit, where 59 percent disapprove and 37
percent approve. It's his worst grade for that subject in any of four Bloomberg polls taken since
September 2009. The Obama administration expects a record budget deficit this year of more than $1.5
trillion, or 10.6 percent of GDP, according to projections the White House released in February. It was
$1.4 trillion for the 2008-2009 fiscal year, which covers the end ofGecrge W. Bush's presidency, and
Obama has said that the current fiscal shortfall as well as theunemployment rate are inheritances from his
Republican predecessor's administration.
""My biggest fear is we have people in government who don't have a clue about what is going on in the
economy,"" says poll respondent Jim Heeter, 66, from Glendale, Arizona. ""They have never run a business
or had to make a payroll.""
Economy, Health Care
Slim majorities disapprove of Obama's handling of the economy and health care. When it comes to
creating jobs, he gets 46 percent approval, addressing problems on Wall Street, 42 percent support,
running the war in Afghanistan, 46 percent approve, and managing the BP Plc oil spill, 46 percent
support.
Forty-five percent say they have become more supportive in recent months of tougher regulations for Wall
Street. The momentum is heading in the opposite direction from the White House and Democrats on most
other issues.
Almost half say they have become less supportive in recent months of federal money being loaned to
automotive companies to help them stay in business, while 37 percent have become less supportive of
the health-care overhaul passed by Congress earlier this year. A majority, 61 percent, say the nation
should wait and see how the health-care legislation works or leave it alone, while 37 percent want to see it
repealed.
Arizona Immigration Law
Almost half of Americans say they have also grown more supportive of allowing local law enforcement to
detain anyone who can't produce proof of citizenship when stopped for an offense, as is contemplated in
an Arizona law. Cbama has criticized the measure and the Justice Department has announced it plans to
sue Arizona.
At least half of respondents also say they would be less likely to support candidates who voted to give
financial assistance to the banking or automobile industries.
Americans are roughly divided on whether they would be more or less likely to support a candidate who
voted against extending unemployment benefits because of concern over the cost. A measure providing
such support worth $34 billion is stalled in Congress.
Clinton Popularity
The disaffection with Obarna and Democrats doesn't carry over to all Democrats. Hillary Clinton, 62, is
viewed favorably by 61 percent of respondents and a quarter of Americans, including 30 percent of
Republicans and 21 percent of Democrats, say the nation would be in a better place if she had been
elected president.
The Tea Party movement, which has been mainly associated with Republicans, has lukewarm support in
the poll. A majority of 58 percent of all respondents says it would make no difference to them if a
candidate was backed by Tea Party activists, while a third of Republicans say that kind of backing would
make a candidate more appealing to them.
Those who are more likely to think the Tea Party is a simplistic and misguided movement -- 44 percent of
all respondents -- include Democrats, 65 percent, and those with the highest incomes, 52 percent.
Independent voters are divided on whether it is misguided or has rightly identified that the nation would be
better served by reduced federal government, compared with 39 percent overall."
5098,"SECURITY COUNCIL PRESIDENTIAL STATEMENT ON THE RECENT INCIDENT IN THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN
The Security Council deeply regrets the loss of life and injuries resulting from the use of force during the Israeli military
operation in international waters against the convoy sailing to Gaza. The Council, in this context, condemns those acts
which resulted in the loss of at least ten civilians and many wounded, and expresses its condolences to their
families. The Security Council requests the immediate release of the ships as well as the civilians held by Israel. The
Council urges Israel to permit full consular access, to allow the countries concerned to retrieve their deceased and
wounded immediately, and to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance from the convoy to its destination. The
Security Council takes note of the statement of the UN Secretary—General on the need to have a full investigation into
the matter and it calls for a prompt, impartial, credible and transparent investigation conforming to international
standards. The Security Council stresses that the situation in Gaza is not sustainable. The Council re-emphasizes the
importance of the full implementation of Resolutions 1850 and 1860. In that context, it reiterates its grave concern at
the humanitarian situation in Gaza and stresses the need for sustained and regular flow of goods and people to Gaza as
well as unimpeded provision and distribution of humanitarian assistance throughout Gaza. The Security Council
underscores that the only viable solution to Israeli-Palestinian conflict is an agreement negotiated between the parties
and re-emphasizes that only a two-State solution, with an independent and viable Palestinian State living side by side in
peace and security with Israel and its other neighbours, could bring peace to the region. The Security Council expresses
support for the proximity talks and voices concern that this incident took place while the proximity talks are underway
and urges the parties to act with restraint, avoiding any unilateral and provocative actions, and all international partners
to promote an atmosphere of cooperation between the parties and throughout the region."
5099,Yes
5100,"I am on travel and will not return to the office until the afternoon of June 1. I will be reviewing e-mail intermittently. If
you need immediate assistance please contact Marisa McAuliffe by phone at 202-647-2972 or email at
McauliffeM5@state.gov."
5101,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Tuesday, June 1, 2010 6:08 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
Text of EU-Russia statement on Gaza to be issued later today
Here is the text of the statement that will be released at the EU-Russia Summit. 1.4(D)
B1
1.4(B)
""The EU and Russia regret the loss of lives during the Israeli military operation against the Flotilla sailing to Gaza. The EU
and Russia demand a full and impartial inquiry of the events and circumstances. The EU and Russia call for immediate
opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and people to and from Gaza."""
5102,"I will be out of the office and not checking email Friday, May 28, 2010; Our offices will be closed Monday, May 31. I will be back
in the office Tuesday, June 1.
/"
5103,"Call anytime. Sid
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
5104,"Bill will be at prebrief, then has speech on India. Still checking with Jim."
5105,"Ebeling, Betsy.
Tuesday, June 1, 2010 9:12 AM
H
RE:"
5107,"June 1,2010
For: Hillary"
5108,"Madam Secretary,
In advance of your meeting tomorrow with George Soros, below is some information in response to the letter you
received from Soros proposing increased USG support for the American University of Central Asia (AUCA). SCA favors
providing more USG support for AUCA
Since 9/11 the United States has provided more than $15 million to AUCA in support of its endowment and various
other initiatives. For a majority of these contributions the Soros Foundation matched one dollar for every two dollars
provided by the USG. The major USG contributions to AUCA were two grants to the university endowment, the first in
2003 for $10 million, the second in 2008 for $3 million. Other USG support for AUCA included funding for two advisors to
the AUCA president on accreditation and development, support for the journalism faculty, and scholarship funds for
students from Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Afghanistan to attend the university.
Soros has proposed that the USG increase this support, offering a 1-1 match of $10 million each from State and his
foundation, totaling $20 million over the next five years. Last fall SCA received the same proposal from Soros, and they
have been discussing the issue with Soros' staff.
A little bit of additional information from SCA on AUCA: The university has made significant progress this year on a
number of its key objectives and remains a unique institution in Central Asia, a place where students are judged solely
on merit and a forum for free expression and critical thinking. The university achieved an important milestone this year
related to its U.S. accreditation, signing an agreement with Bard College under which AUCA graduates starting next May
will receive full diplomas from Bard College, an institution accredited in the United States. In addition, AUCA recently
established a new partnership with the American University in Kabul facilitated through state of the art video classroom
technology and recently announced the appointment of Andrew Wachtel, from Northwestern University, as the new
AUCA president who will take office this summer.
I will include this note (in addition to Soros' letter) in your materials for your meeting with Soros tomorrow. Please let
me know if you would like any further information.
Thanks,
Mike
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709"
5109,Your wish is my command ...
5110,I will prepare for you to sign tomorrow. I just love her sense of humor!
5111,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence *En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:30 am BI-WEEKLY MEETING w/MANAGEMENT TEAM
10:00 am Deputy Secretary's Conference Room
10:00 am WEEKLY MEETING w/UNDER SECRETARIES
10:45 ant Secretary's Conference Room
10:50 am VIDEOS (6)
11:10 am George Marshall Room, '7th Floor
11:15 am PHOTOS(4 groups)
11:30 am Secretary's Outer Office
11:30 am GROUP PHOTO w/VISITING MIDDLE EAST DEMOCRACY
11:40 am ACTIVISTS PARTICIPATING IN MIDDLE EAST PARTNERSHIP INITIATIVE
Treaty Room, 7th Floor
11:45 am OFFICE TIME
12:30 pm Secretary's Office
12:30 pm MEETING w/JACK LEW
1:00 pm Secretary's Office
1:15 pm MEETING w/JEFF FELTMAN
1:45 pm Secretary's Office
1:45 pm MEETING w/ANNE-MARIE SLAUGHTER
2:15 pm Secretary's Office
2:30 pm MEETING w/INDIAN EDUCATION MINISTER KAPIL SIBAL
2:45 pm Secretary's Conference Room
3:00 pm PRE-BRIEF FOR THE INDIA STRATEGIC DIALOGUE
4:00 pm Secretary's Office
4:00 pm MEETING w/SANDY VVEILL
4:30 pm Secretary's Office
4:45 pm MEETING w/GEORGE SOROS
5:15 pm Secretary's Office
5:30 pm MEETING w/MELANNE VERVEER
6:00 pm Secretary's Office
6:15 pm (t) DEPART State Department *En route Private Residence
6:25 pm (t) ARRIVE Private Residence ###"
5112,"""It was worse than a crime. It was a blunder."" Talleyrand."
5113,"Gaza: it's Hamas's move now
Hamas must seize the initiative if there is ever to be an end to Israel's occupation of Palestine
•
•
c) Jeremy Greenstock
o quardian.co.uk, Wednesday 2 June 2010 12.29 BST
So it has happened again. Nearly 18 months after the Israelis bombed Gaza to a wasteland, with barely a load of building
materials allowed in since then, Turkey has taken the brunt of an operation of humanitarian assistance gone wrong.
The UN must establish the facts impartially and independently and, if laws have been broken, those responsible must be
held to account. Political demonstrations posing as relief flotillas go wrong too easily and Israel understandably has to
prevent weapons being smuggled into Gaza. But was this really the best way to bring the ships to shore for examination?
A commando attack on civilian ships looks callous and disproportionate. No one should have been hurt, whatever the
emotions behind all this.
Why is Gaza under siege in the first place? Under international law, the Israelis are responsible as the occupying force for
the proper administration of the territory; and half the point of Israel is not to be above the law. Yet they are creating a
traumatised territory of 1.5m neighbours, many of whose children seem to want to grow up to be suicide bombers. They
are also pouring fertiliser on al-Qaida's ground.
The director of UNRWA operations in Gaza, John Ging, gave a speech in London this week entitled ""Illegal, inhuman. and
insane: a medieval siege on Gaza in 2010"". This objective humanitarian practitioner should be listened to. How has Israel,
the only democracy in its region and a symbol of the need for racially inspired violence to end, come to risk any claim to
international legitimacy in its handling of this situation?
Hamas are the enemy of Israel, but they do not have to be. They preach violent resistance too readily, yet over the past
17 months they have been trying to control the militant groups intent on threatening Israel with rockets — imperfectly
perhaps, but not a single Israeli citizen has been killed (alas, one immigrant worker was) by a rocket since the Gaza
bombing stopped in January 2009. They are also the implacable opponents of al-Qaida. They won a fair election in 2006
and claim to respect democracy. Let's test them on that. At present, Hamas security people are being sniped at by the
Israeli Defence Forces when they try to arrest other militant groups. This is genuinely getting insane.
The unwisdom of reliance on angry military responses is all the clearer when the mood in Palestine, in both the West
Bank and Gaza, is steadily moving towards a negotiated end to the occupation. I am convinced from my own direct
experience that Hamas is prepared to establish and respect a long-term ceasefire so that the talking can start without the
threat of violence, and that they would enter in good faith, if that were reciprocated, into negotiations to establish two
states in the disputed territories, Israel and Palestine, with their own rights and responsibilities under international law.
The distortion of their position, a little of it the fault of their own PR, does no side any good.
If a comprehensive negotiation is too much to expect for now, what about a first step? I believe an arrangement to end the
blockade is within reach if only Israel, Egypt and Gaza would test the possibilities of dialogue. Hamas have indicated that
they could cease all attacks on Israeli soil, close the tunnels, release Gilead Shalit and stop the import of arms into Gaza if
the blockade was ended, an agreed number of Palestinian prisoners were released and Gaza began to be rebuilt.
The Palestinians of course have work to do on their own internal reconciliation, while the relationship between Fatah in
the West Bank and Hamas in Gaza remains so bad. But the UN, the US, Russia, the EU and the Arab world must make a
much more serious attempt to test the possibilities, putting ordinary Israelis and Palestinians first, not their own political
comfort.
We are coming close to losing the chance of a two-state solution. US policy, based on a West-Bank-only approach, is
locked in a cul-de-sac if Gaza is left out of the equation, because majority Palestinian support will be lacking. Israel is
confident in the knowledge that it cannot be militarily defeated.
But that ignores the huge danger of losing the political, diplomatic, legal and moral high ground. This matters in today's
world, as the US and the UK discovered in Iraq, because government authority and public opinion interact closely, and
legitimacy breeds support.
Israel's relationship with Turkey was the key to a broader understanding with the Islamic community and others beyond
the west. That now lies in tatters. If Israel is left as the permanent occupier, or controlling a one-state structure with part of
its population downgraded or imprisoned, it will truly be a disaster for its people and what they stand for.
I hope that Hamas will not sit back and enjoy Israel's discomfiture. They have so far, for a political organisation, attracted
much too narrow a range of international support. If they wish to be widely accepted as a negotiating partner, they must
unequivocally accept the only fully justified condition set by the international Quartet — the cessation of violence —
underline that their objective is a two-state settlement, and win international friends for the ending of the occupation. In
whoever's hands, bombs, bullets, rockets and iron bars will achieve nothing. But a push for justice will.
•This article was originally written for the Times but not published"
5114,"FYI:
USIBC Launches New Education Initiative to Strengthen K-12, Vocational, and Higher Education Linkages in the U.S. and
India
June 2, 2010 - Washington, DC - On the occasion of its 35th anniversary, and looking ahead to the global economy of
the future, the U.S.-India Business Council (USIBC) today announced the launch of a new initiative aimed at
strengthening institutional linkages between academia, industry and NGOs focusing on the elementary, vocational and
higher education sectors in both countries.
""The United States and India must be committed partners in building the workforce of tomorrow, a partnership that will
unleash opportunity, spur growth and sustain prosperity not just in our countries but across the global community,"" said
Harold McGraw III, incoming USIBC Chairman and Chairman, President and CEO of The McGraw-Hill Companies. ""To do
this, we must focus on strengthening our educational ties at every level. By working together our two countries can
equip the next generation with the education and skills necessary to compete and win in the global economy.""
Mr. McGraw gave the keynote address before a packed audience of over 400 U.S. and Indian business, government, and
education leaders at USIBC's 35th Anniversary Summit, entitled ""A Pivotal Period in U.S.-India Relations: Tackling
Education, Infrastructure and Inclusive Growth.""
On the eve of the first-ever U.S.-India Strategic Dialogue, India's Union Minister of External Affairs, SM Krishna, U.S.
Education Secretary Arne Duncan, India's Minister of Human Resource Development, Kapil Sibal, and India's Ambassador
to the United States, Meera Shankar, joined hundreds of top business leaders in Washington to participate in the U.S.-
India Business Council 35th anniversary deliberations.
USIBC's Education Initiative will serve as a dynamic platform for business, NGOs, and academia to provide vital input into
both the U.S. and Indian governments - such that the synergies between American and Indian business and educational
communities are unleashed.
""We can talk about strategic, defense, civil nuclear, renewable energy and every other type of commercial cooperation,
but if we do not develop the skill sets in our respective societies to sustain such collaboration, all this talk will never be
successfully converted to action,"" Ron Somers, President of the U.S.-India Business Council, noted. ""How fortunate it is
that families across all walks of life in both our societies so highly value education. We have much to learn from one
another, and much to accomplish - to prepare for the challenges of the 21st Century,"" Somers said.
The USIBC Education initiative will focus on three thrust areas:
1. Higher Education: USIBC will host the U.S.-India Higher Education Forum (HEF) at the invitation of the U.S. and
Indian governments. The HEF will serve as the premier platform to enlist academia, industry and NGOs to strengthen
linkages between U.S. and Indian educational institutions from both countries. The HEF will provide a formalized
network for industry, academia and the NGO community to provide direct policy input to the U.S. and Indian
governments in all areas of education, with an aim to facilitate greater collaboration, including the opening of India's
higher education sector.
2. Elementary K-12 Education : USIBC has embarked on a survey of rural and urban, private and public K-12 schools
throughout India to identify best practices that are working well in educating students, while assessing needs where
industry, NGOs and government may join together to fill gaps. With the support of Ryan International Group, one of
India's leading educators, both financial and intellectual resources will be mobilized to transform these and other
schools in a manner that promotes replication of successful models across India.
3. Vocational Training and Skills Development : USIBC will partner with its member-companies to feature Case
Studies of Vocational Training and Skills Development that are being implemented across India. The exercise will
attempt to enlist more corporations to participate in this important area of human capacity building. Programs helping
to train thousands of workers will generate employment opportunities and sustain economic growth now and for the
long future - in both countries.
India is embarked on expanding its community college system, including technical training institutions, as well as inviting
interest in implementing 30,000 new colleges and 1,500 universities over the next decade.
The United States continues to be the most sought after destination for Indian students studying overseas, attracting as
many as 113,000 each year to American universities and colleges. The U.S. wishes to remain a magnet for attracting the
best and the brightest from around the world by promoting institutional partnerships between U.S. based educational
institutions and new counterparts. Integral to this core knowledge infrastructure, industry must be involved in this
enterprise.
The McGraw-Hill Companies (NYSE: MHP) is a global information and education company providing knowledge, insights
and analysis in the financial, education and business information sectors through leading brands including Standard &
Poor's, McGraw-Hill Education, J.D. Power and Associates and Platts. McGraw-Hill established business operations in
India 40 years ago. Through its partnership with CRISIL, India's leading ratings, research, and risk and policy advisory
company, Standard & Poor's is helping facilitate access to capital to drive economic growth and job creation in the
country. Through its partnership with Tata, McGraw-Hill Education is delivering innovative, digital solutions to help
workers acquire the 21st century skills they need to succeed in today's global economy. India is home to McGraw-Hill's
largest employee population outside of the U.S. and is the company's fourth largest market.
The U.S.-India Business Council, formed in 1975 at the request of the Government of India and the U.S. Government to
advance commercial ties between the world's two largest free-market democracies, is hosted under the aegis of the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is the world's largest business federation representing more
than 3 million businesses and organizations of every size, sector, and region. The U.S.-India Business Council celebrates
its 35th Anniversary at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce on June 2, 2010 in Washington, D.C. For more information please
visit www.usibc.com .
www.usibc.com"
5115,"Strobe Talbott •
Wednesday, June 2, 2010 6:21 PM
'Cheryl Mills.; Jake Sullivan (DOS)
follow up on Afghan matter
Hillary, as promised, I connected with Bruce Jones at NYU about Spanta. Bruce got in touch offered to help Spanta put
together an arrangement at NYU that might have a Brookings offshoot. Spanta said he needed to decide with Karzai
whether in fact the timing was right for him to leave. He just got back in touch with Bruce saying he's decided to stay on
a bit longer. That said, he's agreed to participate in some Track II regional work that Bruce has underway. All in all, it
sounds as though this has ended up in the right place for now. Bruce, Martin and I will be open to other NY/DC
possibilities down the road when Spanta's situation changes. Thanks again for the truly terrific event at Brookings.
Regards, Strobe"
5116,Fyi
5117,"I am currently traveling outside of the country with limited access to email. If you need immediate assistance, please
contact Nora Toiv (ToivNF@state.gov) or Joanne Laszczych, (Laszczych.l@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
If it is an emergency after business hours, please reach out to our Operations Center to have them reach me.
Thank you
cdm"
5118,"the world together-""Fourth Turning""...might want to re-read the ending chapters of Neil
Howe and Bill Strauss book-love you so
Ok"
5119,Nothing that can't keep. Actually somewhat quiet night.
5120,Will track down
5121,Fyi — cir to team for addressing as appropriate
5122,"John Ryan; Susan Mcnamara;
Corrine Ebeling; Delano, Omorinsola; Claps,
Boys home closing, but numbers don't tell full story
By Burt Constable I Daily Herald Columnist
Published: 6/3/2010 12:01 AM
When the goal is turning around lives of young abused and neglected boys, filling out the scoresheet
is more complicated than simply marking wins or losses.
For the past 15 years, Ann G. Deuel has lived in Arlington Heights, but her heart has resided in Jamal
Place, a three-story graystone at 1335 S. California Ave. in the North Lawndale neighborhood of
Chicago. As a founder and executive director of Jamal Place, Deuel can tell countless stories about
the boys, ages 11 to 17, who have spent time in the group home and about the army of suburbanites
from St. Charles, Naperville, Lake Zurich and Lisle who have volunteered, donated and served on the
board to help those kids. Lots of people in that field have good things to say about Deuel and Jamal
Place.
But when the new fiscal year begins on July 1, the Illinois Department of Children and Family
Services will not renew its contract with Jamal Place, forcing those kids to go to other facilities.
""To shut us down and deny kids this opportunity is unconscionable,"" says Deuel, as she takes a deep
breath and dabs at her eyes in an attempt to keep her emotions in check.
She and her staff operated last year through a $1,041,000 contract with DCFS to provide a group
home for 10 wards of the state. They've carved out a wonderful reputation in 15 years, so what
happened?
The easy answer is that DCFS put the group home under a new performance-based contracting
system that determined Jamal Place fell short of benchmarks for keeping kids from running away,
requiring hospitalization or ending up in juvenile detention.
""Taxpayers expect and deserve positive results in the children we serve,"" says DCFS spokesman
Kendall Marlowe. Jamal Place simply didn't measure up in the areas the state measures.
Because Illinois has trimmed the number of wards of the state from a high of 52,000 in 1997 to only
15,500, a much higher percentage of those kids have mental illnesses, substance abuse or other
problems. Since the state measures an agency's performance by days that the kids are physically
present in the home, Jamal Place, with its small population, got bad marks when a child was
hospitalized for a mental-health issue or detained by a judge.
""We did what was clinically advisable for these children and we got dinged for it,"" says Brian Barclay,
assistant executive director of Jamal Place. ""We did what was in kids' best interest.""
There is no consideration given for ""incremental improvements in youth behavior, which occur as
trusting relationships develop,"" Deuel notes. ""I wish they could find a way to measure the individual
aspects.""
When compared with similar facilities, Jamal Place graded lower, Marlowe says, adding that it ""isn't a
happy day"" when the state ends an agreement with a facility that has ""good people"" and has done
""good work"" in the past. He says DCFS did renew a contract with Deuel for a different transitional
living facility that serves an older population.
One of Jamal Place's ""unfavorable"" outcomes involves a kid who already had a criminal record when
he came to the group home at age 14. Now 17, he says he ended up in juvenile court after he made a
mistake by hanging with the wrong people on the day when he stole a woman's purse.
""I've got a good relationship with the staff and residents. We did things as a family,"" says the teen,
who now is living with a grandmother. ""I love my grandmother, but I'd rather be at Jamal Place. I'm
trying to do everything in my power to get back to Jamal Place.""
Intangibles aren't part of the bureaucratic process. There isn't a place on an evaluation form to give
credit to Deuel and her staff for leading the effort that closed a local ""crack house."" There's no way to
measure the improvements in a former resident that led him for the first time to sign ""love"" before his
name on the Mother's Day card he sent Deuel this year. There's no scoresheet for the local gang
leader who stopped preying on Jamal kids when he was confronted by Deuel and recognized her as
the woman who gave him a Christmas present a few years earlier. The interview for this story is
interrupted when that man calls Deuel, who is helping him find a legitimate job.
""It is enormously frustrating to me that the attachment the boys develop with our staff members is not
a 'measurable' outcome,"" Deuel says. ""These are our children. Long after DCFS is done with these
kids, our door is still open.""
Last weekend, many former residents came back to explain how Jamal Place helped them. On June
26, Jamal Place will celebrate its 15th anniversary with a picnic and walkathon in Douglas Park,
across the street from the home. Deuel and her staff are hoping DCFS finds a way to give them more
time, another year to continue its mission.
""I've always maintained that God won't let us fail,"" says Deuel. ""For 15 years, that's been the case,
and now we've got this challenge."""
5123,fyi
5124,FYI.
5125,"7:30 Ukranian Foreign Minister Gryshchenko
8 Greek Prime Minister Papandreou"
5126,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Friday, June 4, 2010 7:21 AM
H
Fyi"
5127,I've already asked him. Waiting to hear back
5128,little more time.
5129,Roger - will do.
5130,"June 4, 2010
For: Hillary"
5132,"Background on the Women Deliver Conference CONTEXT The second Women Deliver conference will take place in
Washington, DC on June 7-9, 2010. This conference is an international gathering that focuses on maternal health and
will include an estimated 3,000 representatives from governments, civil society, multilateral organizations, and the
private sector. The aim of the conference is to generate political commitment and financial investment for fulfilling
Millennium Development Goal 5, which pledges a three-quarter reduction in maternal mortality and universal access to
reproductive health by 2015. The conference is one of several international gatherings this year that will include a focus
on maternal and child health (MCH). As you know, this issue will also feature at the G-8, where the Canadians are
offering a flagship initiative on MCH, and at the Millennium Development Goals Summit in September, where the UN
Secretary General is sponsoring a Joint Effort on Women and Children's Health. The US will be represented at the
Women Deliver conference by Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius, Undersecretary of State Maria
Otero, Ambassador Melanne Verveer, and a host of other USG participants. Please note: You recently recorded a video
message that will open the conference.
The full script is below.
SUGGESTED TALKING POINTS
• For too long and in too many places, women have received inadequate care when they give birth. As a result,
childbirth remains a leading cause of death and injury to women worldwide. • The United States has elevated the
issue of maternal health in our development work through the Global Health Initiative, a $63 billion dollar proposal to
help countries improve health outcomes through strengthened health systems and integrated service delivery, with a
particular focus on the health of women, newborns and children. This conference—along with other international
gatherings this year, including the G-8 and the Millennium Development Goals Summit in September—presents a unique
opportunity to reinvigorate our commitment to maternal health. • When women prosper, their families and
communities prosper. Women deliver for the world – now the world needs to deliver for them. ADDITIONAL
BACKGROUND The theme of this year's Women Deliver conference is ""Delivering Solutions for Girls and Women,"" with a
focus on political, economic, social/cultural, and technological solutions. Conference organizers plan to emphasize the
following messages:1) The Millennium Development Goals will not be achieved without investing in
women.2) There is just enough time, if the world commits funding now, to achieve Millennium Development Goal 5—
an additional US $10 billion annually by 2010 and US $20 billion by 2015.Women Deliver was launched at a conference
in London in 2007. Jill Sheffield is the President of the organization.
FINAL VIDEO SCRIPT WOMEN DELIVER CONFERENCEWASHINGTON, DC
I am delighted to welcome all of you to this conference and to thank you for the work you are doing to put maternal
health at the top of our development agenda. Your commitment to this issue has raised awareness and inspired action
around the world. We know that women represent our greatest opportunity for progress in this century. If the potential
of women is fully developed, everyone benefits. And this can't be done without improving maternal health. But for too
long and in too many places, women have received inadequate care when they give birth. As a result, childbirth remains
a leading cause of death and injury to women worldwide. The United States has elevated this issue in our development
work through the Global Health Initiative, a 63 billion dollar proposal to help countries improve health outcomes
through strengthened health systems, with a particular focus on the health of women, newborns and children. We
commend the Canadian government for focusing much-needed attention to this issue by offering a flagship initiative on
maternal and child health at the upcoming G-8 meeting in Muskoka. The US also congratulates the United Nations
Secretary General for convening governments, civil society, multilateral organizations, foundations and corporations to
engage in a much-needed global effort to promote women's and children's health. These efforts—and this conference—
present a unique opportunity to reinvigorate our commitment to maternal health, because when women prosper, their
families and communities prosper. Women deliver for the world – now the world needs to deliver for them. Thank you."
5133,FYI per your question yesterday.
5134,"Fyi
bent. rn Jun V+ LU..5.5.‘fi Lulu
Subject: Back Operation"
5135,"From Landler today, middle of the piece -- not too much to it:
Israel also took issue with the Obama administration's assertion that the United States had warned Israeli
officials to exercise caution and restraint in intercepting the flotilla.
""I was not contacted by anyone in the administration about this,"" said Michael B. Oren, Israel's ambassador to
the United States. Mr. Oren said he was not aware that anybody else in the Israeli government had been called
and was seeking clarification from the administration.
A spokesman for the State Department, Philip J. Crowley, said the United States had ""extensive contacts"" with
Israel and Turkey before the flotilla set sail. ""We expressed to the Israelis the need for caution and restraint in
dealing with civilians, including American citizens,"" he said."
5136,"From an INR report just released:
Western Europe: Publics Credit U.S. for Relief to Haiti
Britons, French, Germans, Italians, and Spaniards say the United States has done more than other countries to assist
Haiti following the devastating January earthquake. Though relief efforts in Haiti have not themselves directly impacted
opinion of the United States, the belief that the United States generally assists disaster-stricken countries does positively
affect U.S. image."
5137,Good stuff from Medvedev
5138,"You mentioned at Thursday's 8:45 meeting that you had talked to Qureshi and that he thought he was not going to get
any trade access to the EU. My EU contact writes that the Member States in the EU have been slowing up progress on
trade concessions to Pakistan, although the draft language negotiated w/ Pakistan still leaves room for the Commission
(which is pro-trade) to keep working on enhanced trade benefits for Pakistan. Still, the original timetable of 2011 will not
be kept. Even more ominous, any agreement will have to go to the European Parliament, which is down on Pakistan for
human rights reasons.
I have also read Esther's note to you on UN Security Council Reform. You are right that overall our best position for the
moment is
Have a good trip!
AM"
5139,"Will do.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
5140,"Will follow up with Huma and report back.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
5141,Fyi
5142,Ok
5144,I'm planning on writing it up -- v useful for the QDDR.
5145,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Sunday, June 6,2010 11:46 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
Fw: Washington Post ""Outlook"" Article
2010.06.06.WashPostisraeli Narrative.doc
You'll want to make sure you see this. AM"
5146,"Yes went to 2
With nephews for till halftime
And dougs party for second half"
5147,"Most observers seem confident that tomorrow will go smoothly. Shaun has indicated that he'd like to speak with you
late morning or early afternoon. I'll check back in tomorrow am."
5148,"This is from the political officer in London:
David Cameron will be given the right of reply after the PM's statement this afternoon -- followed by Q&A. UUP MP
Sylvia Hermon is likely to be ""unhelpful"" during the Q&A.
The Conservatives are becoming exasperated by the rumors that appear in the press and elsewhere that they are
unsupportive of the agreement. Our contacts say the Tories have been completely consistent in supporting the
government on devolution, though they don't believe HMG handled the issue well (i.e. allowing the exclusion of the UUP
and SDLP).
Reg Empey is scheduled to meet his MLAs tonight to review the document and prepare for the working group with
SDLP's Margaret Ritchie."
5149,FYI. They want to issue as USG. Are you comfortable with that?
5150,It's true you've got to consider the source...
5151,"The Secretary's Call Sheet for
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov
February 8, 2010"
5152,"We should get you together with Jim, Jack, and Anne-Marie on the early side tomorrow, so that your guidance can be
reflected in the BCL that Anne-Marie's shop is preparing for Jim and Jack for the 5:30 DC.
For what it's worth, my overall take on the document
My other concern
\"
5153,"Jim appears to be largely out-of-pocket, and it's critical that he be part of the conversation. So tomorrow might be most
productive."
5155,Ok.
5156,"We also have equadorant foreign minister that never happened sat if u want to make that one as well. Either today or
tomorrow"
5157,"February 8, 2010
For: Hillary"
5159,"Just saw the email from Sid - was working on the below report. Shaun apparently had a much
more pessimistic view of what Cameron would do than all of our Parliament watchers, who felt
confident from the get-go that he would support the deal.
PM Brown praised all parties involved; stressed the need to adhere to the dates laid out in
the agreement several times; welcomed the supportive Westminster interventions during the Q
and A of SDLP Mark Durkan and DUP Peter Robinson and Nigel Dods, but pointedly expressed hope
that other parties (read UUP, whose MP was either not present or simply didn't speak) would
express their support as soon as possible.
As expected, David Cameron praised the agreement and all parties; raised the desire that all
parties (read SDLP and UUP) be given time to review the document; and pointedly asked the PM
what issues that were not expressly mentioned in the agreement would be addressed by the
Working Group -- to which Brown responded, ""all the issues outstanding from St Andrew's.""
Cameron and Brown praised the U.S. role, singling you out. Brown also twice referred to your
offer to host an investment conference.
Overall, nothing concerning from the Tories...on the contrary, full support, a request that
the minority parties have a chance to review and some questions on outstanding issues.
UUP MLAs meet tonight to review.
Note: DUP interventions were balanced.. .Dods raised parades and decommissioning as reminder
of outstanding issues, but stressed desire of all parties ""not to go back"" to the bad old
days. Minor dig at previous Sinn Fein ""threats."" Robinson stressed cooperation in the
negotiations. Struck a statesmanlike tone."
5160,Ok
5162,fyi
5164,Phil got a readout from Ops following the call. Memcon will be done tomorrow because of the snow day.
5165,"Your staying home tomorrow will make lots of parents at higher levels feel ok about staying home with their kids. I may
be one of them!"
5166,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, June 6, 2010 4:21 PM
H; Mills, Cheryl D
Huma Abedin
Re: Brief memo for Cheryl Mills on Colombia - for Secretary Clinton
We are planning to find a careful but effective way to address progress on human rights issues and continuing
challenges in your press avail. We will explain it to the Colombians and highlight it for Cindy. We can also read out your
meetings to her."
5167,"and more
See traffic b/I
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 02/08/2025"
5168,"Welcome back to an unbelievable snowy mess in DC!
I wanted to tell you that I met with the Lithuanian official who is heading up the Community of Democracies. Lithuania
has the lead for the next two years. They are extremely energetic and recognize that CD needs to be reinvigorated. It
was not given much leadership from us during the Bush years and besides democracy got a bad name — among other
reasons. Their plan is to create a few working groups focused on issues that are current and important with specific
practical goals and tangible results — among them, one will be focused on women and their critical role. As you know,
they have a female president, the EU has just established a Gender Institute in Vilnius and they remember Vital Voices
when you headed up the conference in Iceland and the successor conference which was held in Lithuania in 2001. We
talked about a more concerted commitment -- to advocating for women and the role they need to play in conflict
resolution (1325), helping women in Afghanistan and working to help women in eastern Europe and the Caucuses where
things appear to be going backwards in many ways (takes me back to our first-ever VV conference in Vienna).
I agreed that we would co-chair the gender working group with Lithuania.
The Lithuanians believe that in many ways the younger generation takes for granted what the older generation fought
for (they remember being a ""Captive Nation and how the US kept them going with an embassy when they was little
likelihood at the time that they'd ever become a democracy), and that today democracies are struggling in too many
places. It's as though we have to take back democracy's good name and focus it as a universal value to address the
critical challenges.
Mike Posner has the lead on CD. I talked to him about all of this. He is all for our doing the gender working group as
something tangible. He is concerned about where the Community of Democracies goes more broadly. Since this was a
creation of the Clinton Administration and since democracy is under siege in so many places, I hope we will find a way to
work with the Lithuanians and others who still want to see it make a difference. In some ways it may be more relevant
today. They are planning the first ministerial in Krakow in July and hoping so much that you will be a part of it.
Assuming I can get there, I'm going to their embassy in the morning where several government reps of participating
countries will be meeting to announce next steps, including the gender working group."
5169,"RELEASE IN PART
B6
I drove the roads - I live lots of packed hard snow and two stuck cars. It's
worse than it seems"
5170,"Still haven't heard anything about funeral arrangements for Mr Murtha. I am planning to attend, wherever it will be
(johnstown or arlington). Will let you know when I hear something. It's such a big loss for the community, the state and
the country. PA officials are talking about a special election on May 18th."
5171,"more
Am going to connect w/ bellerive in am
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 02/08/2025"
5172,"You ok with this?
I was deeply saddened to hear of the passing of Congressman Jack Murtha. From the battlefields of Vietnam to the hills
of Western Pennsylvania to the halls of Congress, Jack Murtha lived by the Marine Corps credo ""Semper Fidelis,"" never
wavering in his faithful commitment to the country he loved and the men and women who bravely defend her. In war
and in peace, he fought for what he knew was right, even when it was unpopular. He was a fierce advocate for working
families struggling with a changing economy and for better health care and equipment for servicemembers. And over
the course of more than three decades in Congress, he became one of our nation's most respected voices on national
security and foreign policy. Presidents of both parties sought his advice and generations of colleagues looked to him for
leadership and wisdom. As Senator from New York serving on the Armed Services Committee, I was fortunate to call
Jack a friend and mentor. And as Secretary of State, I continued to rely on his expertise and judgment. I knew that Jack
would always shoot straight, like the Marine he was, and never shy away from a difficult question or a tough fight. Today
our country has lost a decorated war hero and a distinguished public servant. The men and women of the our armed
forces have lost a tireless champion. And the people of Pennsylvania's 12th district have lost a neighbor, an advocate,
and a true friend. My thoughts and prayers are with them and with Jack's beloved wife Joyce and their family. He will be
sorely missed."
5173,"The hearings on wednesday are off. The senate foreign relations committee moved its hearing to Thursday am. And
house foreign ops is tentatively scheduled for thursday afternoon. Given the forecast, neither of these may actually
occur.
Starting to hear that murtha funeral will be saturday in johnstown, but that is not confirmed yet. Will let you know."
5174,"more
If I can take a diff car I am going in; if not I'll work from here"
5175,"Not sure - but this is a good excuse to bring him in for an OTR with you. Lona mentioned you wanted to see Tom
Friedman - with your ok, we could schedule both (separately) over the next month or so
I'd very much like to get back in the habit of bringing someone or a small group in every few weeks."
5176,FYI.
5178,"Ebeling, Betsy
Monday, June 7, 2010 9:30 AM
RE: Sad news
We cannot seem to change DCFS' decision and it looks as though it will close. You were the first recipient of their yearly
honor. Where will these boys go?"
5179,"Jake Sullivan <
Tuesday, February 9, 2010 9:57 AM
preines(
H; CDM; Huma Abedin
Re: David Brooks
Philippe and I had an offline conversation about this and I agree entirely. I think it makes sense for you to meet
with influencers on a regular -- though not intrusive -- basis. An OTR conversation with you is the best way to
help guys like Brooks ""figure out"" how things work.
On Tue, Feb 9, 2010 at 9:44 AM, PIR <preines wrote:
Not sure - but this is a good excuse to bring him in for an OTR with you. Lona mentioned you wanted to see
Tom Friedman - with your ok, we could schedule both (separately) over the next month or so
I'd very much like to get back in the habit of bringing someone or a small group in every few weeks."
5180,"Here is an assessment from EUR:
Re: s comments on Romania/Moldova
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
In
E31
2006, he said, ""We are the only country, the only people, which remain still divided. Germany reunited its
nation; Romania remains still divided into two countries. But, I repeat, our reunification will occur inside of the
European Union and in no other way."" In 2009, he said ""Who can imagine that a head of Romanian state will
sign a treaty to entrench the Molotov-von Ribbentrop Pact?""
During his late January trip to Chisinau, Basescu's message on territorial integrity and supportive of
EU integration. He said ""Romania recognized the state borders of the Republic of Moldova inherited from the
former Soviet Union. Romania agrees to sign an agreement in regards to the existent border regime, the way it
was inherited from the USSR."" Romania and Moldova, in fact, have good relations and no real border issues;
the two governments are working on an agreement to make cross-border travel easier for Moldovans.
The biggest challenge to Moldova's territorial integrity is Transnistria, where de facto authorities rely on the
long-term presence of Russian forces for political support. Moldova's leaders seek a transition to a multilateral
presence and withdrawal of Russian troops, but this is not likely without a political settlement on Transnistria's
reintegration. Moldovan and Transnistrian authorities are pursuing quiet confidence building measures and
(Russia, Moldova, Ukraine, Transnistria and the OSCE are the 5
parties and the US and EU are the 2 observers), but
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 02/09/2030"
5181,"From EUR:
Update on Ukraine Election Situation
With over 99.9 percent of the vote in Ukraine counted, Yanukovych leads by 3.5 percent
(almost 900,000 votes) and is the clear winner and next president. The Central Election
Commission should complete its vote tabulation today and must certify the results within ten
days; certification is expected as early as Friday. Tymoshenko, who has been silent publicly,
plans to bring cases of alleged electoral fraud to the courts, but they will not change the
result. Tymoshenko claims that she intends to work within the law and not to incite street
protests.
Our recommendation is
EU Ambassadors in Kiev
have recommended the same approach to Brussels, but want to revisit it if there is no progress
by Friday. Medvedev called Yanukovych today with praise for the conduct of elections, but
stopped short of congratulating him on his victory.
Following certification of the election, Tymoshenko is likely to appeal within the legal five-day
period. This will likely push back an inauguration date until early March."
5182,FYI
5183,"Phil believes he has nailed down where things are on Belarus. Note is coming your way spelling out state of play and
proposing a cable, which they will prepare."
5184,"Cherie Blair <
Monday, June 7, 2010 9:57 AM
confidential
As you know I have good links to the Qataris. Sheikha Mosah's son is the 31/32 year old Crown Prince and she is keen
that he starts to build a wider international profile. He has been appointed head of the Qatar National Food Security
Programme which is designed to deal with Qatar's food security issues its a $30 billion programme. He is aware that
food security is an issue you are majoring on and would love to meet with you in person to discuss this and to explore
potential partnership areas between US and Qatar including possible participation in the US/World Bank Food Security
Fund. He is also keen to talk more generally about US/Qatari cooperation and even suggested they could help out with
the Oil spill problem. There is apparently a Arab Food Security Summit in October 2010 and he would like to discuss Us
participation in that too.
IS a meeting possible he is more flexible on place and times than his mother! Or maybe we could set up an initial phone
call.
Can you let me know if this appeals to you at all?
Cherie Blair"
5185,"Importance: High
Madame Secretary:
You have asked about the USG's options regarding the 10 Amcits from Idaho in Haiti, from the New Life
Children's Refuge, who are currently being charged with child abduction and criminal association crimes under
Haitian law. Depending on the GOH' s intent, we believe the USG would have the following basic options:
Please let us know if you need more information, and especially if you would like us to contact DOJ to
inquire further."
5186,"As I told Susan, Cheryl asked for a memo from L for S BY TOMW AM outlining S's
options re the Amcits. Her questions:"
5187,Fyi
5188,From the Murtha office below....still checking on whether there will be something in D.C. on Friday.
5190,"Importance: High
FYI
- - —"
5191,"As I told Susan, Cheryl asked for a memo from L for S BY TOMW AM outlining S's
options re the Amcits. Her questions:"
5192,"FYI:
Brazilian FM defends dialogue with Iran
BRASILIA, Feb. 9 (Xinhua) -- Brazilian Foreign Minister Celso Amorim said Tuesday Brazil would maintain negotiations
with Iran on uranium enrichment and oppose any sanctions against Iran.
Amorim said Brazil was against the production of nuclear weapons, but Iran had the right to carry out a peaceful nuclear
program.
""Dialogue is still possible. What we want is to make sure (that the uranium will not be used to make weapons) through
peaceful ways and dialogue,"" Amorim told reporters.
Under a draft deal brokered by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the UN nuclear watchdog, most of Iran's
existing low-grade enriched uranium should be shipped to Russia and France, where it would be processed into fuel rods
with a purity of 20 percent.
Iran declared on Tuesday it had started the process of producing 20-percent enriched uranium inside the country.
In response to Iran's announcement, the U.S.-led Western countries have warned to take political and economic
sanctions against Iran.
For his part, Amorim said he considered any kind of sanctions ineffective and dangerous because they might cross a limit
and jeopardize peace.
Iran's president made an official visit to Brazil in November, during which the Brazilian government defended Iran's right
to have its own peaceful nuclear program including uranium enrichment similar to Brazil's, following international
standards."
5194,"Mitchell/mara/jake agree best thing for mohlo to be told that you got full debrief on their meeting and given the
schedule challenges for tomorrow, would not be able to do mtg."
5195,Fyi
5196,"Saw that you are on phone
Let me know if u need anything."
5197,Ordering now.
5200,"Thanks, Gertie, for the very sweet effort. I know such great women, lucky me."
5201,"See below from Tom. We can put together a conference call at your convenience with Arturo, Craig, Carmen, CDM, me,
and perhaps Jim.
On the Mitchell material, for reasons that elude me, the two versions of the Blair statement were done on the classified
system. Ops will get the statement and the other document to you ASAP. I've also asked them to convert the statement
so that it can be emailed to you."
5202,"Trust me, I share your exasperation. But until ops converts it to the unclassified email system, there is no physical way
for me to email it. I can't even access it."
5203,"The first has Mitchell's edits, the second is original from Blair's guy to Mara:
Draft Statement by the Secretary as Revised by Senator Mitchell
Original Draft Statement by the Secretary Submitted by Tony Blair
The United States is determined to bring about a two-state solution. Believes there is a strong basis for doing
so. Believes it can be done by combining a renewed political negotiation with change on the ground, bottom up, as set
out in Prime Minister Fayyad's plan for a Palestinian state.
To this end,,Tony Blair, as Quartet Representative, will work in partnership with Senator Mitchell to support the political
negotiation by mobilizing the efforts of the international community: (1) to build support for the institutional capacity
and future governance of a future Palestinian state; (2) to improve freedom of movement and access for Palestinians;
(3) to encourage further private sector investment; and (4) to bring change in the living conditions of the people in Gaza."
5205,More from Tom.
5206,"PIR <preines(
Wednesday, February 10, 2010 1:16 PM
CDM; Huma Abedin; Jake Sullivan
FLOTUS re XFLOTUS
From Larry King last night:
LARRY KING: How is the -- it was so bitter -- well, rather bitter in the campaign with Hillary, when they were going at
each other.
MICHELLE OBAMA: Yes, it seems so long ago.
KING: Yes. How are they doing now together?
OBAMA: They're great. Hillary Clinton is an amazing secretary of State. I mean she would have been an amazing
president. She was an amazing attorney. She's a phenomenal professional. And she's proven to be a tremendous asset in
-- in so many ways. So the relationship is -- is -- is strong. They share the same views in terms of international policy and
approach. And we're seeing the outcome of that on the international stage. I think, you know, we can say pretty clearly
that the United States -- the -- the view of this nation around the world has changed. People are enthusiastic about the
potential. Things aren't perfect. We're still a nation fighting two wars. But when we travel around the country, the
excitement and the possibility are palpable. And I think that's because of the president, but I think it's also because of
our secretary of State.
http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1002/09/1k1.01.html"
5207,"1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
B5
I called Bill about that this morning when I saw the stories.
In short, he thinks this is all playing out in Moscow, not in Geneva."
5208,Troubling news from Europe.
5211,B5
5212,sigh
5214,"Jake Sullivan
Cheryl Mills
Mike Fuchs
Carmen LomeIlin
Craig Kelly
Jim Steinberg (tentative)
Arturo Valenzuela
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Ops will connect to you."
5215,Will call when I get off call before 4pm
5216,"Just FYI on the below, from one of those crazy right ""magazines"" - notes that the home you referenced in your Prayer
Breakfast remarks has since closed.
I checked in with Lissa & Melanne, they didn't know it closed, which makes sense since it happened in 2002 after you left
the White House.
I made it clear that your longtime commitment to this issue - throughout your public career - is well known, and you
remain very proud of your work with Mother Teresa in opening this home in 1995. And that your partnership is a
success story to be emulated.
Again, this is just FYI
http://www.worldmag.com/webextra/16398
ADOPTION I Hillary Clinton continues to hail an adoption home she helped open with Mother Teresa that has since
closed its doors By Emily Belz
WASHINGTON—An adoption ministry Secretary of State Hillary Clinton hailed as a home she helped open with Mother
Teresa no longer handles adoptions and its phone line has been disconnected, though at last week's National Prayer
Breakfast Clinton spent five minutes of her 30-minute speech relating the story of its opening. Last Thursday Clinton
described Mother Teresa ""beaming about what this meant for children and their futures,"" seemingly oblivious that the
Mother Teresa Home for Infant Children in northwest Washington, D.C., is now defunct. She said she worked tirelessly
to ""cut through all the red tape,"" although it appears that red tape prevented the work from continuing. According to a
pastor at the church next door to the home's former location, the adoption ministry failed to take off because the
Roman Catholic nuns who ran it weren't allowed to care for babies without medical personnel on site. ""I'm not sure the
legal thing that came down upon them, but they realized they needed to expend their energies in another way,"" said
Maureen Freshour, who along with her husband, David, pastors Chevy Chase Baptist Church and lives nearby. Freshour
has stayed in touch with the nuns from the Missionaries of Charity order who ran the home and said that the remaining
three or four sisters have moved to another house in Washington, where they are ministering to the homeless.""This has
been a core issue—adoption—whether the home [Clinton] talked about survived or not,"" said Chuck Johnson, chief
operating officer of the National Council for Adoption. ""It's an issue she's been consistent on.""During her speech on
Thursday, Clinton reminisced about the 1994 National Prayer Breakfast when she attended as first lady and Mother
Teresa was the speaker. The Roman Catholic nun delivered a blistering speech about abortion, saying, ""Any country that
accepts abortion is not teaching its people to love, but to use any violence to get what they want."" Mother Teresa then
called on attendees to fight abortion through adoption: ""Please don't kill the child. I want the child. Please give me the
child.""The audience that day gave her a standing ovation—but President and Mrs. Clinton, both pro-abortion, did not
stand. Afterward, Mother Teresa asked to meet with Hillary Clinton and they went to talk behind a curtain on the stage,
sitting on folding chairs, Mother Teresa in sandals even though it was winter.""She told me that she knew that we had a
shared conviction about adoption being vastly better as a choice for unplanned or unwanted babies,"" Clinton related last
Thursday. ""And she asked me—or more properly, she directed me—to work with her to create a home for such babies
here in Washington.""Clinton followed through and set up a home for unwanted babies in Washington in just over a year,
no small feat in a city that was known then for its inefficient and corrupt bureaucracy. The Mother Teresa Home for
Infant Children opened in June 1995 in the district's affluent Chevy Chase neighborhood to house eight pregnant
mothers and their babies—but it remains unclear whether it facilitated any adoptions.I called the Missionaries of Charity
in Washington, a worldwide Roman Catholic order established by Mother Teresa. The nun who answered the phone said
she couldn't give her name because they aren't allowed to talk to the press. She did say, however, that the sisters who
are in the order now were not in the order when the adoption home opened, so she wasn't sure why it closed. She
added that the order sold the Chevy Chase house in 2002. ""We work with the poor and we didn't have any work there
because it's a rich neighborhood,"" she said. The sisters, she added, are now working with the homeless and those with
AIDS in a more transitional neighborhood in the northeast section of town on Otis Street.
###"
5218,"I will look into what happened to it after 2002 (LH was released 6/03, so better than 04)"
5219,See message below from your friend the egyptian foreign minister....
5220,fyi
5222,Fyi
5223,I
5225,More details...
5226,"I suspect they want him in Johnstown, but I will double check."
5227,Will do
5228,Checking
5230,Fyi
5231,"Welcome back. I sent to your house a small binder of material in preparation for the Dodd/Berman meeting tomorrow
morning. I am happy to walk you through any part of it or answer any questions tonight or first thing in the morning."
5233,FYI
5234,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA©state.gov>
Friday, June 11, 2010 4:05 PM
Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
A clarification on Turkey/Brazil
AM"
5235,"Our clips service doesn't have the license necessary to provide FT (or Reuters) content, so here's the long awaited FT
profile -you'll be especially interested in the guest column David Milliband wrote:
An FT interview with Hillary Clinton
By Daniel Dombey
FT
June 11 2010 22:21
This is what it is like to be Hillary Clinton. The motorcade, twisting and skidding through rain-splashed
streets for more than an hour; the public meetings and camera lights at journey's end; the spotlight that
has not let up for two decades. It is almost as if the 2008 US presidential election - hailed as the most
exciting for a generation - had never ended.
But this is a campaign without a vote. Today, Clinton's convoy is snaking through Sao Paulo, Brazil, not
South Hampton, New Hampshire. She herself is no longer an aspirant for the White House, despite what
the overnight flights, town hall meetings and strategy sessions that make up her gruelling schedule might
suggest. Instead, she is in Latin America to shore up relations with the region and promote a new idea of
US leadership, one very much built around herself.
She's had bigger and more ecstatic audiences than the 700-odd students and staff crammed into the hall
tonight at Zumbi dos Pradares, an Afro-Brazilian university, but she's still greeted by a wave of raised
arms as the audience snaps away at her with their mobile phones.
In the convoy moments before, she was wrapped in a shawl, suffering from a cold and angry at the delays
that pushed us into the side streets speckled with box-like bars, warehouses and love hotels while
Brazilian motorists sought to cut into our path. There is no sign of that now. With the metabolism of a
born politician, she feeds off the energy of her audience and takes questions from students, teachers and
local celebrities for an hour. Hillary Clinton never looks happier than when she is centre stage.
Most US secretaries of state wouldn't bother with this sort of event, much less initiate it and arrange for it
to be screened on the biggest local channel. Yet this is what Clinton does on almost every foreign trip -
and she seems to spend half her life on her official 727, crammed with long-time aides and armed
bodyguards. The schedule is backbreaking and constantly shifting. She has notched up more than a
quarter of a million miles since taking office.
On this Latin America trip, thrown into confusion by an earthquake in Chile, we have already visited four
countries in 24 hours. We go to tiny Uruguay, where our stay is so brief we check into a hotel just for a
shower; Argentina, where we spend almost all our time at the presidential palace; Chile itself, where we
don't leave the airport; and Brazil, where we spend almost a full day.
So what exactly is Clinton trying to do on this never-ending world tour? Travelling with her for a week,
talking to people inside and outside the administration, I tried to find out.
""We now have a case to make and it is not just a case that is made to the president or the prime minister
or the foreign minister or an ambassador,"" she tells me a few weeks later, as she perches on a sofa in her
expansive office, with its view of the Lincoln Memorial. ""People now have a voice and an opinion and a
vote in many instances on the direction that their own societies take ... I want to model a different kind of
leadership that is open and willing to listen but [also] to stand our ground if necessary.""
She argues that these trips of hers help to restore the US's image in the wake of the Bush administration
- by making contact with public opinion abroad, and so boosting American power. Her aides say that, as a
battle-hardened politician who also happens to be one of the most famous women in the world, she is
ideally placed to carry out the task. But the deeper question is whether she is merely implementing the
foreign policy crafted by Barack Obama, her boss and former rival, or whether her role - and ambitions -
go beyond that.
Is she a kind of saleswoman-in-chief for the US, I ask? ""Well, I think that is part of the job,"" she replies,
toying with the napkin underneath her glass of water. ""If you are making a case for American values and
for American leadership, you have to make it where people now get information ... Given the bridges we
had to build and some of the repair work we had to do, we had to travel.""
As in S'ao Paulo, her system is under strain - ""I've been fighting this all day,"" she says as she masks a
cough set off by her allergies (Washington's cherry blossom trees are shedding their flowers). Life is still
hectic - the volcanic ash cloud has just all but paralysed Europe and televisions throughout the State
Department are showing the first British election debate. But Clinton remains enthusiastic, affable and
unhurried, her speech peppered with exclamations such as ""oh my gosh"", even as she discusses issues of
state. She politely asks if I have any updates for her about Europe's airspace shutdown and tells me she's
been talking to Norway's foreign minister about it.
""He said that this dust gets into engines of any size, even Air Force One - it's chunky! I don't know how
else to describe it,"" she says, an odd note of hilarity entering her voice as she pronounces the word
""chunky"".
Clinton often speaks in this eager, unvarnished way - a world away from the clipped, on-message manner
of her immediate predecessor in the post, Condoleezza Rice. If anything, she is an undiplomat - known
less for calibrated circumlocutions than for her plain speaking and sometimes her gaffes, a woman who
retains both a formidable political constituency and a laugh she once admitted can send cats scurrying
from a room.
Her staff point out she is only the third elected politician in 60 years to have served as secretary of state,
and the first to come from outside the foreign policy establishment since James Baker, George H.W.
Bush's right-hand man and perhaps her most illustrious recent predecessor. She may be the most
substantive politician in the office since William Jennings Bryan, the three-time presidential candidate who
served as secretary almost a century ago. ""Her stature on the world stage, her almost presidential
stature, has set her apart,"" Bill Burns, the top career diplomat at the State Department, tells me. ""Leaders
want to meet her. And the town hall meetings do make a difference with public opinion.""
State visitor Hillary Clinton is greeted by Air Force Base Commander Colonel Celso de Araujo at S'ao Paulo
airport in March
Back in Sao Paulo, the meeting at the university ranges far from the confines and dramatis personae of
traditional diplomacy. Annie, a young woman with red and blue dreadlocked hair, tells Clinton about her
dance and percussion classes and asks how to study in the US without paying college fees. A nervous
young man confesses himself lost halfway through an abstruse question about tariff policy; Clinton,
smiling and nodding in that vaguely automatic way of hers, bears with him all the same. Another female
student asks for an autograph. When answering, Clinton sometimes opens her eyes wide as she
emphasises a phrase; at other moments, seemingly at random, she pulls her hands apart as if
demonstrating the size of a fish.
Then a law student called Marina asks about abortion - which is illegal in Brazil - and Clinton moves into
treacherous terrain. She speaks of the Brazilian hospital she visited in the 1990s that treated not just
expectant mothers but women suffering from the consequences of backstreet abortions. ""Wealthy women
have rights in every country,"" she says. ""And poor women don't."" Her strength of feeling can't be hidden
as she denounces ""the great toll that illegal abortions take and the denial of women being able to exercise
such a fundamental personal right"".
Tom Shannon, the US ambassador to Brazil, tells me later: ""I understand the possible concern that we
might have come close to domestic issues. But she wasn't laying out a prescription for Brazil. She was
sharing her experience as a woman in American politics and as secretary of state."" It's true: Clinton
doesn't quite cross the line. Onstage, she is controlled without seeming artificial, convivial without
appearing over-effusive, what a previous age would call a real trouper. At the podium she looks straight
ahead, her lips carefully expressionless. Still, the old competitive instincts haven't left her. Perhaps it is
the lecterns at press conferences, reminiscent of the Democratic presidential debates, but on exiting the
podium at a joint appearance with Argentina's president Cristina Fernandez, Clinton makes clear her
satisfaction at having had the last word. The expert debater who usually bested Obama has not left the
stage.
Yet that competitive urge coexists with what one insider describes as her ""almost inhuman loyalty""
towards Obama. Her mastery of the facts - an ""information carnivore"" one of her officials calls her -
comes despite the consensus in much of Washington that her role consists largely of implementing the
foreign policy Obama and his inner circle have framed, rather than helping frame it herself.
In Sao Paulo, she shows her loyalty in striking fashion when she is asked repeatedly about positive
discrimination - another sensitive topic in Brazil - not least because, Clinton herself observes, Afro-
Brazilians account for more than half the country's population but only 2 per cent of university students.
""That suggests to me that some special steps need to be taken [in] recruiting and admitting students so
that they can have a chance to succeed,"" she tells the hall, again inching towards domestic politics, before
speaking of her pride in the progress the US civil rights movement has made in the past half-century. She
says: ""The election of Barack Obama, many believe, was the greatest accomplishment of all because it
demonstrated that an African-American could be elected president of the United States.""
Among the crowd, I catch my breath and scribble down her words. It's hard to think of a more fulsome
statement from the woman who fought so hard against Obama - and who squandered a huge poll lead
and millions of dollars in the struggle against him.
The great collaborator Clinton has established strong working relationships within the Obama
administration
When I ask Clinton later about how she managed to move from the antagonism of the primary race to the
obedience of office, she dismisses my question with an anodyne ""that's politics"". She adds: ""We're
working really hard and well together ... It just never comes up any more, it seems like ancient history to
me."" Not so ancient, I think, that she is willing to admit the failings of her campaign. ""I always run
inclusive and successful organisations,"" she retorts when I ask her whether she'd applied any lessons from
that searing experience to her new post.
She admits she didn't want the job at State - she says she was exhausted by the election and missed the
Senate -. ""but at the end of the day, I'm pretty old-fashioned and if the president asks you to do
something, you'd better have a really good reason why you can't."" Also, she adds: ""Suppose I had won
and I were asking him to be in my cabinet ... I would have wanted him to say yes.""
Others say the relationship is more complex, that by dint of her loyalty and unflagging hard work, Clinton
has moved closer to the charmed circle and made herself an even more formidable political force than
before. ""Quite simply, she gives good advice and the president over a year and a half has recognised
that,"" says Anne-Marie Slaughter, head of the State Department policy planning unit. ""The relationship is
based on her performance in the job.""
By all accounts, it's a collaborative partnership, though not perhaps a warm one. Clinton boasts a good
working relationship with the main players of the administration - and has formed something of an
alliance with defence secretary Robert Gates, although on life-and-death issues such as Afghanistan, it is
Gates, not her, who has taken the lead. As one official told me, secretaries of state have often either been
popular with their own department - Colin Powell comes to mind - or with the rest of the administration -
as was Condoleezza Rice - but Clinton has managed to be both.
In truth, Clinton's language remains harder-edged than Obama's - she recently claimed that Iran's
Revolutionary Guard had staged a slow-motion coup - and she has sometimes been more willing than he
is to hint at using the military. ""She seems to step up with a bit of spine just at the right time,"" says Kurt
Volker, a US ambassador to Nato under George W. Bush.
She has also assumed an ever more prominent role in talking to leaders such as Benjamin Netanyahu of
Israel and Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan - apparently because she is trusted both by them and Obama.
Meanwhile, she has been careful to keep her husband, the former US president, in the background. Aides
say they have barely seen him in the building - though Clinton herself says that behind the scenes Bill
Clinton gives her strategic advice. ""One of his favourite sayings, that I remind myself of all the time, is a
kind of baseball saying,"" she says: ""Don't major in the minors; keep your eye on not just the headlines
but the trend lines.""
It is her co-operative stance rather than any notable effort to set out a grand vision of her own that is the
chief theme of her time so far at State. When I ask Clinton to name her proudest achievement in office,
she replies ""the effective and collaborative approach that this administration has taken towards identifying
and solving problems."" A more process-oriented, less provocative answer would be hard to imagine.
But maybe, I think, the US has less scope for grand strategy than it did in the past couple of decades,
when the country seemed to bestride the world colossus-style. Clinton herself suggests that so formidable
are the tasks confronting the US that the administration has little scope to enter into internecine fights but
needs instead to focus on the challenges to hand. Whatever the reason for her stance, it seems to be a
smart decision - by all accounts she's overcome many of the suspicions the White House retinue had
towards her.
""It's fair to say that she was not born into the administration's inner circle but slowly but surely, for the
most consequential decisions, she now has a prime seat at the table,"" says one official. Praising what he
calls her ""Terminator-quality durability and determination,"" he adds: ""She's done an amazing amount of
work, judging that the way to build a strategic vision is bottom up, by mastering the details.""
Indeed, Clinton's ability to master the most arcane foreign policy briefs is the marvel of her building. She
has dropped into obscure working groups and shown an unnerving knowledge of their details. At her
confirmation hearings last year she exchanged facts about the arctic with an Alaskan senator; at the
meeting in So Paulo she becomes enthused about freight transport policy both in Brazil and the US. She
herself acknowledges that finding her feet on foreign policy was something of a struggle, despite her
campaign claims of expertise in the field. ""It was so intellectually challenging, just to get our arms around
all of these issues,"" she says. During her first year, she was criticised for apparent gaffes - including the
way she called for Israel to halt all building of settlements on occupied territory only to hail a partial freeze
a few months later as unprecedented. On an election campaign, she says, ""you may be in a different city
four times a day but you have a message you're trying to deliver that is repetitive and aimed at your
audience. But here you might deal with 10 different countries' problems, six different regional or global
challenges in the course of a day.""
As the Latin America tour shows, she is now trying to do both - travel incessantly and solve an array of
international issues. She is at the forefront of the US's efforts to consolidate relations with a number of
important countries - predominantly Russia and China, but also rising powers such as Brazil, Turkey,
Indonesia and South Africa - and to cool down anti-American feeling in hotspots, notably Pakistan. She
says the push is working, hailing a ""change in public opinion in places that were pretty negative about the
US"" - a reference to Russia and Pakistan. But it is far from smooth sailing. Differences about Iran and
over Israel's raid on aid-bearing ships off Gaza have stoked tensions with Turkey and Brazil recently, amid
questioning of the effectiveness of the Obama administration's policies.
During my time with her on the road, the stop in Brazil is the focal point - not surprising given the
country's increased profile as Latin America leader. Clinton is now heading the administration's push to
secure sanctions on Iran, and in Brasilia she tries and fails to win President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva to her
cause. She employs an almost combative tone at a press conference with Celso Amorim, Brazil's foreign
minister. At moments she appears to barely contain her irritation, as she denounces ""an Iran that runs to
Brazil"" as well as other countries such as Turkey and China ""telling different things to different people to
avoid international sanctions"". Amorim is spiky in his own way - drawing parallels to the 1990s sanctions
on Iraq and the claims about weapons of mass destruction before the 2003 war. ""Of course, I don't agree
with everything the Secretary said,"" he says.
It is not a happy experience - indeed this past week both Brazil and Turkey voted against sanctions at the
United Nations - yet Hillary Clinton is nowhere near giving up. Years ago, one of Bill Clinton's biographers
described his approach to government as a ""permanent campaign"", and it appears to be his wife's
preferred form of existence as well. If there is one constant in Clinton's life, it is that she never throws in
her cards, whether what motivates her is power or public service.
""Never, never!"" she exclaims, when I ask whether she ever thought of walking off into the wings after the
frustrations and indignities of her time at the White House. ""I have a very realistic sense of what high-
stakes politics requires and it took me a while to get there because it's shocking when you are in the
arena ... but once you figure it out, you can take it seriously for purposes of analysis and understanding,
but you can't take it personally."" Such treatment seems to rankle all the same. She's been listening to
coverage ahead of the British debate and is plainly irritated by the coverage of the leaders' wives.
""Whether a woman's running for office or she's supporting her husband who's running for office and she
gets criticised for wearing open-toed shoes or for the colour of her coat, there's just a lot of history that
you bear if you are a woman who puts herself out in the political arena,"" she says.
Another country Clinton boards her official 727 to fly from Sao Paulo to Costa Rica
Injustice towards women appears to be the issue that most enthuses Clinton in this job - as in her many
other incarnations in American public life, whether as First Lady or before. ""I feel passionately it is in not
just the American national security interests but the world's, that women be given the opportunities and
the tools to make the most out of their own lives,"" she says.
In the 1990s she steered clear of reading the newspapers because of the way she was treated. Today, she
says, ""I certainly don't read coverage of me, I read what else is going on that I need to know about to do
my job."" ""It's all baloney,"" says Philippe Reines, her press adviser, who set up the meeting with her and is
sitting to one side in her office.
""Yeah, yeah, right, that's what he tells me,"" Clinton responds.
I wonder. She may not read the stories about her, but she has boosted her domestic profile still further by
talking to American magazines such as Esquire, Vogue and Parade. To what end? Clinton has said she will
only serve one four-year term as secretary of state - understandable, given the grind of the job. When I
ask whether she expects a woman president in the next decade or so, she responds: ""I'd love that,
obviously I would love that. I want to be front and centre when it happens.""
""Any chance it would be you?"" I ask.
""No, no, I don't think that's in the cards,"" Clinton says. She's given more categoric denials in the past. ""I
think that there's a whole generation of young women and not so young, but mature, seasoned women
who are earning their stripes and recognising how tough it is out there. It is not for the faint of heart to
run for president, and I believe it is harder for women, it just is, and that's just a fact."" But, says one US
official, ""all the profiles and all this media treatment undercut the argument that she is finished with
electoral politics. Why do all this stuff? She's already Hillary Clinton. You have to ask: 'What's the idea
behind raising her domestic profile still further?""
Indeed she is now, by some counts, the most popular politician in America and some in Washington say
she could be a good fit for the vice-presidential slot in the 2012 elections.
Back in Sao Paulo, once the town hall meeting is over, Clinton faces a seven-hour flight to Costa Rica. The
journey goes on and on, and as saleswoman-in-chief for the US in an unruly world, she faces a long, hard
road. Today the US sometimes struggles to assert itself on the world stage. But the obstacles are rather
fewer if the product she is pitching is herself. A secretary of state like none before her, Hillary Clinton,
long one of the most formidable figures in US politics, is looking stronger than ever.
Daniel Dombey is the FT's US diplomatic correspondent
David Miliband: ""Hillary is a rock star ... she has a great sense of fun, and a great sense of humour""
It's too early to start chalking up a scorecard because Hillary Clinton, and the Obama administration, is
laying the foundations for long-term change in America's foreign policy. The challenges are immense -
probably more difficult than the inheritance of any previous administration. But American leadership is
essential and a commitment to multilateralism - in fact multi, multilateralism using different and
overlapping forums - is real and right.
You also have to remember that Hillary is a rock star. When I arrived at the Nato Foreign Ministers
meeting in March 2009, it was a nice surprise that all the staff, never mind the press, seemed to have
turned out in droves for my arrival. Then I realised that Hillary was 10 minutes behind me.
That said, the thing that most surprised me about working with Clinton was not her intelligence or her
hard work, all of which are well known, but that behind the serious exterior is someone who has a great
sense of fun, and a great sense of humour. She has seen politics from all sides, and can laugh at herself
as well as at others.
She's a remarkably good listener, always synthesising ideas and opinions to develop her own. She thinks
strategically as well as tactically. She's also very, very unpompous. Hillary is a very political person but in
a particular way, she honours politics and public service and believes that democratic politics is not a
necessary evil, but a calling of value and vocation. She knows you win some and you lose some, but it's
essential to take part.
There's one other thing. Hillary is a people person in that she thinks deeply about the psychology of the
people she's dealing with. Their motivation, their loyalties, their culture. It's real emotional intelligence in
trying to understand why people disagree and how you can get them to agree. I think that must be why
so many other members of the administration say she is a very good colleague.
David Miliband is shadow foreign secretary
Gideon Rachman: ""Relations between the White House and the State Department are not particularly
close""
A school teacher asked to write a report on Hillary Clinton's stint as secretary of state would have to give
her 10/10 for effort but a rather more modest mark for actual achievements - maybe a six or a seven.
Secretaries of state are generally judged on two criteria. First, how have they done in the endless
bureaucratic turf wars that characterise Washington politics? Second, how effective have they been in
promoting US foreign policy in the wider world? Success in one area usually helps in the other. Henry
Kissinger was a superb Washington infighter - and his close relationship with President Nixon made him
all the more effective overseas. Colin Powell, George W. Bush's first secretary of state, was widely
admired outside the US - but came out on the wrong side of many of the Washington battles, which
limited his ability to get things done in the wider world.
Hillary Clinton has skilfully avoided being sucked into the debilitating Washington struggles that so
damaged Powell. Despite the often poisonous rivalry between the Obama and Clinton camps during the
campaign, Clinton has a good working relationship with the president. But while relations between the
White House and the State Department are cordial, they do not seem to be particularly close. Clinton
appointed many loyalists from her own campaign to the State Department, with the result that State is
rather detached from Obama's inner circle. Obama's penchant for making high-profile speeches in foreign
capitals such as Cairo, Prague, Tokyo and Istanbul means that the president himself has done more than
anyone else to define his administration's approach to the world.
That still leaves a role for Clinton to fill in the crucial details of policy. But special representatives have
been appointed to deal with Afghanistan and the Middle East - and the Treasury is critical to China policy.
Asked about Clinton's impact as secretary of state, one senior European policymaker purses his lips and
says: ""She's done some great trips, and she's highly professional. But it's hard to see any particular area
where she has really driven policy.""
Gideon Rachman is the FT's chief foreign affairs columnist
David Rothkopf: ""When she has been asked to deliver tough messages, she has done so unflinchingly""
Hillary Clinton has been a cautious secretary of state: she has protected the president well and pursued
his agenda without upstaging him - an early concern, given her stature. She has worked very well with
other members of the cabinet, and is reconsidering the role and structure of the State Department.
That includes a review of the role of diplomacy going forward. Clinton has not only acknowledged the rise
of new powers and a changing global power structure but has taken steps to reshape US foreign policy
structure accordingly. An important part of that has been recognising the importance of co-operating with
private and non-state actors such as NG0s, as well as dealing with non-state threats.
When the administration has called upon her to deliver tough messages, she has done so unflinchingly.
This has allowed the president to articulate a strategic vision which Clinton then goes about implementing.
Still, neither the secretary of state nor the president determines the global situation. The US may be the
most powerful country in the world but it is one among many powerful countries, and many aspects of the
situation we face today are beyond our control. The Obama administration has been dealt an extremely
difficult hand: not only Iraq and Afghanistan, but Iran and North Korea's nuclear programmes, the rise of
emerging powers and a complex and still unfolding series of financial crises.
We have gone from a world in which the US thought it had limitless resources and unbounded options to
one where the limits are clear; from a world in which you could work in the GB to one where you have to
work in the context of the G20; a world where new technologies and new powers play a bigger role. All of
those things would dictate a change in foreign policy regardless of who is in office.
Hillary Clinton has established a very solid foundation. The next step is to identify a couple of signature
issues - and have a couple of signature successes. That will take her to the next level.
David Rothkopf is a visiting scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace with expertise in
national security"
5236,"; Huma Abedin<Huma@clintonemail.com>; Jake
RELEASE IN PART B6"
5238,"Are you okay w the below?
Go U.S.!"
5239,"Madame Secretary:
On flight home from Kampala, which was exhausting
Monday, but whatever you hear, the big picture is this:
I am sending Info memo B5
To become operational, any crimes of aggression
1. must still be affirmatively revoted by two thirds votes of states parties
2 no earlier than 2017
3 there will be another review conf probably before this goes into effect 4of the two ways of referring crime one goes
through an exclusive sc trigger;
5 the other branch has
A a prior sc filter *and*
B an ex post sc red light plus
C requires full vote of 9 judges of pretrial division and D nonconsenting aggressor states can opt out and E prosecutor
must have reasonable basis for investigation under definition which F has now been significantly narrowed
I can elaborate Monday
Best
Harold
Harold Hongju Koh
The Legal Adviser
U.S. Department of State
Suite 6421
2201 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20520-6421
202 647 9598 office"
5240,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, June 12, 2010 11:45 AM
Re: Pls Clear: Anniversary of Iran's Disputed Presidential Election"
5241,"Word is that we're going to announce our response to the Israeli flotilla investigation today. Did Jones or Ross speak
with you about it?"
5242,"We have scheduled calls tomorrow with:
- Swedish Foreign Minister Bildt at 9:00 am
- Norwegian Foreign Minister Stoere at 10:45 am You have call sheets for both.
Ok?"
5243,Fyi. I think this call makes sense.
5244,We will connect calls to whitehaven. Unless u want to cancel?
5245,Ok.
5246,He was with me last weekend. He's left for a week in Greece yesterday on erratic email. What's up?
5247,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, June 21, 2010 9:42 PM
Fw: McChrystal in Rolling Stone
R1109McChrystal.pdf
Attached is the doc, in pdf. I will have it faxed to your house.
It's for the NEXT issue of Rolling Stone but AP has a copy. We'll need
Some choice quotes below."
5248,Roger
5249,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, June 13, 2010 10:51 AM
Abedin, Huma
Re: S-Saudabayev call
Will keep you posted."
5250,Aye
5251,"From John Beyerle ... Perhaps the Russians won't send troops:
I just called Karasin. He agreed that the situation had gotten worse in Osh and Jalalabad today but said the Russian
position is still that sending in foreign troops, whether Russian or CSTO, will be counterproductive and lead to more
violence and bloodshed.
The IL-76s that flew in to Kant today were the EMERCOM/M4C planes he told me about yesterday; they have
humanitarian cargo, primarily doctors and medical equipment. I cited the news reports that a battalion of paratroopers
had gone in -- he said there may be some troops on board to guard the plane or beef up security at Kant, but he was
firm that at this point Russia has no plans to introduce its own forces in the south. The main objective was to stop the
violence through peaceful means; Russia had provided the Kyrgyz forces with additional ""technical means"" for
accomplishing that. He said they hoped this would help Kyrgyz forces get control of the situation, which was their main
goal.
I asked about CSTO planning, and possible UN or OSCE PKFs. He said there is no formal CSTO meeting planned,
although people are consulting via phone. He repeated their hesitation to see any CSTO deployments. They have not
yet considered UN or OSCE PKFs, but if the situation continues to deteriorate, he wouldn't exclude the possibility.
Rushailo is currently in Moscow, but may be sent to Bishkek tomorrow or Tuesday. He agreed to call me if there is any
major change in the situation on the ground, or regarding force deployments. Tomorrow is a Russian holiday but he'll
have his cell phone on."
5253,I can talk tonight - whenever is convenient for you.
5254,"Sure could, if it works for you."
5256,Yep - speak w/ you then
5258,"sbwhoeop
Wednesday, May 5, 2010 1:52 PM
H: IMPORTANT. Memo on UK election, am in London, Sid
hrc memo British election 050510.docx
May 5, 2010
For: Hillary"
5260,"I talked to CDM about doing some strategy sessions this week. We discussed trying to do three:
There are obviously a dozen different ways to do this, and a dozen different configurations. So consider this a strawman
- we're eager to hear your reactions."
5261,"I hadn't heard about this piece until you emailed. It comes out later this week but what's leaked so far is definitely a
doozie
Unclear to me why anyone ever cooperate with Rolling Stone"
5262,Talked to Ben. Much to report.
5263,"Below is McC's statement and some early articles:
McC Statement:
I extend my sincerest apology for this profile. It was a mistake
reflecting poor judgment and should never have happened.
Throughout my career, I have lived by the principles of personal honor
and professional integrity. What is reflected in this article falls far
short of that standard.
I have enormous respect and admiration for President Obama and his
national security team, and for the civilian leaders and troops fighting
this war and I remain committed to ensuring its successful outcome.
Aides to U.S. general in Afghanistan slam Obama:
report
20 mins ago
WASHINGTON (Reuters) — Aides to the top U.S. general in Afghanistan insulted some of President Barack Obama's closest advisers,
calling one a ""clown"" and another a ""wounded animal,"" in an article to be published Friday in Rolling Stone magazine.
The article also quotes an aide describing the commander of U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan General Stanley McChrystal's
""disappointment"" with his initial one-on-one meeting with Obama last year.
Quoting all the McChrystal aides anonymously, the article portrays a split between the U.S. military and Obama's advisers at an
extremely sensitive moment for the Pentagon, which is fending off criticism of its strategy to turn around the nearly nine-year-old
Afghan war.
The Pentagon had no immediate comment about the article, which has been brought to the attention of senior officials.
It quotes a member of McChrystal's team making jokes about Vice President Joe Biden, who was seen as critical of the general's
efforts to escalate the conflict and who had favored a more limited counter-terrorism approach.
""Biden?"" the aide was quoted as saying. ""Did you say: Bite me?""
Another aide called White House National Security Adviser Jim Jones, a retired four star general, a ""clown"" who was ""stuck in 1985.""
It quoted an adviser to McChrystal dismissing an early meeting with Obama as a ""10-minute photo op.""
""Obama clearly didn't know anything about him, who he was. The boss was pretty disappointed,"" the adviser told the magazine.
McChrystal, a famous workaholic said to sleep just four hours a day, was brought into Afghanistan a year ago after his predecessor
was pushed out.
The article portrays his teams as disapproving of the Obama administration, with the exception of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton,
who backed McCrystal's request for additional troops in Afghanistan.
Some of the strongest criticism was reserved for Richard Holbrooke, Obama's special envoy to Afghanistan and Pakistan.
""The boss says he's like a wounded animal,"" a member of the general's team is quoted as saying. ""Holbrooke keeps hearing rumors
that he's going to get fired, so that makes him dangerous.""
McChrystal was quoted as saying he felt ""betrayed"" by the leak of a classified cable from U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan Karl
Eikenberry last year. The cable raised doubts about sending more troops to shore up an Afghan government already lacking in
credibility.
""I like Karl, I've known him for years, but they'd never said anything like that to us before,"" McChrystal was quoted as saying in the
article.
""Here's one that covers his flank for the history books. Now if we fail, they can say, 'I told you so.""
(Editing by Washington World Desk)
Copyright © 2010 Yahoo! Inc. All rights reserved.
And from the WSJ:
0 JUNE 21, 2010, 6:55 PM ET
McChrystal's Next Offensive?
Relations between the U.S. military and civilians in the Obama administration have been tense since last year's three-month review of Afghan war strategy, a state of affairs
unlikely to be helped by a new profile of Gen. Stanley McChrystal, the overall commander in Afghanistan, that will appear in Rolling Stone magazine on Friday.
In the eight-page article, released to reporters on Monday ahead of publication, McChrystal appears to belittle Vice President Joe Biden and accuses Karl Eikenberry, the U.S.
ambassador to Kabul, of undermining his war plan within the administration.
Asked by the Rolling Stone reporter about what he now feels of the war strategy advocated by Biden last fall — fewer troops, more drone attacks — the article reports that
McChrystal and his aides attempted to come up with a good one-liner to dismiss the question. ""Are you asking about Vice President Biden?"" McChrystal reportedly jokes. ""Who's
that?""
Later in the article, McChrystal turns more serious when asked about cables sent last fall to Washington by Eikenberry. The cables called into question the major troop increase
advocated by McChrystal's team and the U.S.'s backing of Afghan President Hamid Karzai — views that the ambassador had not previously raised with McChrystal or his staff.
""I like Karl, I've known him for years, but they'd never said anything like that to us before,"" McChrystal is quoted as saying. ""Here's one that covers his flank for the history
books. Now if we fail, they can say, 'I told you so.""
The article, titled ""The Runaway General,"" has already caused nervousness inside the Pentagon, where memories are still fresh of another blistering profile that got a top
commander in hot water: an August 2008 cover story in Esquire <hop://wvav.esquire.com/features/fox-fallon > on Adm. William ""Fox"" Fallon, then commander of all U.S.
forces in the Middle East and Central Asia. The article eventually played a part in Fallon's resignation two years ago.
In that Esquire piece, however, Fallon appeared to directly contradict White House policy on Iran and other parts of the Middle East; the Rolling Stone article makes no such
allegation, but rather is full of jokey put-downs of important Washington players.
Comments in the article attributed to anonymous McChrystal aides are particularly harsh towards some senior members of the Obama administration, including National Security
Adviser James Jones, and other leading politicians, like Sens. John Kerry (D., Mass.) and John McCain (R., Ariz). They also make some unflattering references to
PresidentBarack Obama himself, saying the president didn't seem to know who McChrystal was when he appointed him to run the war early last year.
Only Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who is portrayed as having strongly backed McChrystal's plan for Afghanistan, is singled out for praise by the anonymous McChrystal
aides.
A spokesman for McChrystal did not immediately respond to a request for comment late Monday.
Copyright 2008 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement
<littp://onlinemsi.com/public/pagg/subscriber agreement.html> and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints all-
800-843-0008 or visit
www.djremints.com <htm://www.djrenrints.com>
Top US Afghan commander mocks Biden: report
(AFP) — 1 hour ago
WASHINGTON — The US commander in Afghanistan mocks the vice president and denounces a top diplomat in a magazine interview, while his aides
speak dismissively of President Barack Obama.
Tensions between General Stanley McChrystal and the White House are on full display in an unflattering profile in Rolling Stone of the commander of US
and NATO forces in the Afghan war.
McChrystal jokes sarcastically about preparing to answer a question referring to Vice President Joe Biden, known as a skeptic of the commander's war
strategy.
""Are you asking about Vice President Biden?' McChrystal says with a laugh. 'Who's that?'"" the article quotes him as saying.
""Biden?' suggests a top adviser. 'Did you say: Bite Me?""
McChrystal tells the magazine that he felt ""betrayed"" by the US ambassador to Kabul, Karl Eikenberry, in a White House debate over war strategy last year.
Referring to a leaked internal memo from Eikenberry that questioned McChrystal's request for more troops, the commander suggested the ambassador had
tried to protect himself for history's sake.
""I like Karl, I've known him for years, but they'd never said anything like that to us before,"" McChrystal tells the magazine.
""Here's one that covers his flank for the history books. Now if we fail, they can say, ?I told you so.""
Eikenberry, himself a former commander in Afghanisan, had written to the White House saying Afghan President Hamid Karzai was an unreliable partner
and that a surge of troops could draw the United States into a open-ended quagmire.
The article revisits the friction between the White House and the military last fall as Obama debated whether to grant McChrystal's request for tens of
thousands of reinforcements.
Although Obama in the end granted most of what McChrystal asked for, the strategy review was a difficult time, the general tells the magazine.
""I found that time painful,"" McChrystal says. ""I was selling an unsellable position.""
An unnamed adviser to McChrystal alleges the general came away unimpressed after a meeting with Obama in the Oval Office a year ago, just after the
president named him to take over in Afghanistan.
""It was a 10-minute photo op,"" the general's adviser says.
""Obama clearly didn?t know anything about him, who he was.., he didn?t seem very engaged.
""The boss was pretty disappointed,"" says the adviser.
The profile, titled ""The Runaway General,"" portrays his aides as profane and intensely loyal to McChrystal, while arguing the general has seized control over
the war on the military and diplomatic fronts.
The four-star general also derides the hard-charging top US envoy to the region, Richard Holbrooke, and complains about a dinner with an unnamed French
minister during a visit to Paris.
""Oh, not another e-mail from Holbrooke,"" McChrystal says, looking at his messages on a mobile phone. ""I don't even want to open it.""
In a hotel room in Paris getting ready for a dinner with a French official, McChrystal says: ""How'd I get screwed into going to this dinner?""
""The dinner comes with the position, sir,"" says his aide, Colonel Charlie Flynn.
""Hey, Charlie,"" McChrystal says, ""does this come with the position?""
McChrystal gives him the middle finger.
Copyright © 2010 AFP. All rights reserved"
5265,"Attached is the story in scanned form. Not sure if you can open/read on your berry, so will make sure Lauren has too"
5266,"Oh darn it - sorry I missed your message - I was engrossed in the PSD script.
If you're still up please call."
5268,Will do.
5269,"Will set up
I'm seeing next week and she's flexible so we can do any morning. B6
Think may be traveling but will check."
5270,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence *En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am MONDAY MEETING w/ASSISTANT SECRETARIES
10:00 am Principals Conference Room 7516
10:05 am DROP-BY U/S BURNS' MEETING w/UAE TRADE MINISTER
10:10 am SHEIKHA LUBNA al QASIMI Secretary's Conference Room *Official photo at top.
10:15 am PRE-BRIEF w/AMBASSADOR CdeBACA AND U/S OTERO
10:25 am Secretary's Office
10:30 am RELEASE OF 10TH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
10:50 am Benjamin Franklin Room, 8th Floor
11:00 am OFFICE TIME
3:15 pm Secretary's Office
3:20 pm PHOTO w/ZIA SYED AND FAMILY
3:30 pm Secretary's Outer Office
3:40 pm REMARKS TO THE DIPLOMACY CONFERENCE ON SUB-SAHARAN
4:20 pm AFRICA Loy Henderson Conference Room
4:30 pm OFFICE TIME
5:15 pin Secretary's Office
5:20 pm MEETING w/UNDERSECRETARY BURNS
6:00 pm Secretary's Office
6:00 pm DEPART State Department *En route Private Residence
6:10 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5271,"Today June 14th, is his birthday
202-419-1420 w main
Asst: Katie
Asst. Ali cell
###"
5273,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Tuesday, June 22, 2010 8:14 AM
FW: Rahm's long goodbye
Rahm's long goodbye
By: Glenn Thrush
June 22, 2010 04:34 AM EDT
For all the talk about Rahm Emanuel reaching for the ""eject"" button, the fiery White House
chief of staff isn't leaving in the immediate future — and could serve well into 2011,
according to people close to him.
""It's the opinion in the top levels of the White House that Rahm is going to be here longer
than many people think,"" said a senior administration official, speaking on condition of
anonymity.
Speculation about Emanuel's departure has been a favorite parlor game for nearly a year
— stoked by Emanuel's admission that he'd love to run for Chicago mayor (should current'
Mayor Richard Daley retire, of course), his own kvetching about the rigors of the job,
withering attacks on him from the left and the right and the fact that the average expiration
date on a chief of staff is 18 months.
Emanuel is leaving, but his departure date has proved to be profoundly elastic. Friends
and co-workers said he vacillates from day to day, sometimes minute to minute. He might
leave in December after the midterms; or he might stay until next summer, depending on
whether Daley runs or President Barack Obama asks him to stick around, they said.
And even as he pines for his native Chicago, Emanuel continues to put down real roots in
D.C., recently writing the check to enroll his children in the exclusive Maret School in
Washington through the 2011 school year, according to a person close to Emanuel.
He's shown few signs of loosening his grip on the tiller — bombarding White House
staffers with long-distance calls during the first days of the Gulf oil spill even as he
traveled in Israel for his son's bar mitzvah.
And in a broader sense, it's hard to imagine Emanuel's huge personality extracted from
the political, journalistic and bar stool life of Obama's Washington.
Take the last game of last week's NBA Finals, when any American voter could wander
into Tunnicliff's Tavern on Capitol Hill and witness one of the most powerful men in the
nation egging on the Boston Celtics — screaming at the flat-screen TV, actually — joined
by a merry band that included Sen. Max Baucus (D-Mont.); Sen. Chris Dodd (D-Conn.);
Jim Manley, spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.); and a pair of
favorite reporters from The New York Times and The Washington Post.
Despite a British tabloid story asserting that Emanuel is sick of Obama's ""idealism"" and is
racing for the exit, the former Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee chairman
still loves the attention and power of his current job and hasn't made up his mind when
he's leaving, people who know him said.
""This is BS. And if you need it for translation, it is baseless,"" Emanuel said in a statement
pushing back against a story in the U.K.'s Daily Telegraph portraying Emanuel as restless!
and fed up.
Replacing Emanuel, when he eventually goes, will be no easy task for Obama and the
small clique of close advisers led by Pete Rouse, David Axelrod and Valerie Jarrett.
For one thing, Obama and company need to know what the post-November political
landscape looks like before picking a successor: If Republicans take back one or more
house of Congress, the new chief of staff will need to know how to leverage executive
power against a hostile Hill; if Democrats retain their majorities, Emanuel's successor will
need some of his legislative skills.
Barring a major course correction, Obama, who prizes loyalty and familiarity, isn't likely to
reach too far outside his inner circle, advisers said.
Still, the president is increasingly cognizant of his reputation for insularity and would quite
likely give a serious look at respected former Clinton chiefs of staff Leon Panetta, currenW
head of the CIA, or John Podesta, who runs the Center for American Progress, a major
liberal think tank with close ties to the administration.
Rouse, a senior adviser who served as Obama's Senate chief of staff, is considered the
best pure manager in the White House and a logical choice to replace Emanuel, according
to a half-dozen.administration officials and consultants.
But Rouse's colleagues say the quiet 60-year-old insider loves his work, the Grateful Dead
and his cats — but despises the spotlight and would most likely turn down the job unless
Obama insisted.
""The key thing about Pete is that the president trusts him and would feel very, very
comfortable with him in charge,"" said a Democratic consultant who knows both men well.
""But he probably won't take it.""
One possible candidate — deputy chief of staff Jim Messina, Emanuel's political go-to guy
— is likely to play a major role in Obama's 2012 reelection campaign and is expected to
move to Chicago sometime next year.
In Messina's absence, another Emanuel favorite — Deputy National Security Adviser Tom
Donilon — has emerged as a possible successor, according to people close to the
situation.
Obama has been impressed by Donilon's presentations at the President's Daily Briefing,
and the Rhode Island native has a wide variety of political and governmental experience,
serving as a congressional liaison under President Jimmy Carter, chief State Department
spokesman under President Bill Clinton and a campaign adviser who helped Obama
prepare for debates against John McCain.
One major Donilon drawback: He served as an executive vice president for Fannie Mae,
the bailed-out mortgage giant, and reportedly lobbied against stronger regulatory
oversight.
David Plouffe, Obama's 2008 campaign manager, is another contender, with a reputation
for discipline, team building and solid management skills. But Plouffe has been reluctant to
settle down in Washington, is earning a stellar living as a consultant and hates the press.
Former Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle is also a possible successor, even though
his nomination for Health and Human Services secretary was scuttled by revelations he
failed to report limo rides paid for by a corporate client.
Another White House aide, Phil Schiliro, is a favorite of Obama's for his legislative savvy
and political instincts. But critics said he lacks the range of policy and political experience
that other candidates possess, and that his mastery of the Hill won't mean much if
Democrats surrender their majorities in either house.
Then there's Ron Klain, 49, Vice President Joe Biden's brainy and politically astute chief
of staff, who is said to be intensely interested in making the move from the Eisenhower
Executive Office Building to the West Wing.
Klain — who also served as Al Gore's chief of staff — is well-regarded inside the White
House. Plus, he's got a touch of star power: Kevin Spacey played him in the HBO movie
""Recount,"" about his role in guiding the Gore campaign through the 2000 Florida recount.
Klain's downside: He's essentially an outsider who has yet to develop a serious rapport
with the president, according to insiders.
C 2010 Capitol News Company, LLC"
5276,"http://maxblumenthal.com/2010/06/the-israeli-medias-flotilla-fail/
The Israeli Media's Flotilla Fail
On 06.22.10, By Max Blumenthal
My summaty of the Israeli media's shambolic performance following the flotilla massacre was originally published here in
Hebrew at Dvorit Shargal's excellent Israeli media blog, Velvet Underground. The English version follows:
If the raid of the Gaza Freedom Flotilla was a disaster for the Israel Defense Forces, its aftermath demonstrated an
equally bewildering performance by the Israeli media. The IDF Spokesman's Office churned out one misleading claim
after another, each one more implausible than the next, seeking to implant in the public's mind a version of events that
bore little relation to reality. To a degree, this was to be expected; but it was startling to see how some of Israel's most
respected reporters lined up to serve as military stenographers, barely challenging the IDF's rapidly changing versions of
events. IDF claims about the flotilla passengers' links to Al Qaida, anti-Semitic statements shouted at the Israeli Navy, and
their terrorist intentions were eagerly broadcast by the Israeli media without a second thought. When independent
reporters forced the IDF to retract or ""clarify"" all of these claims, Israeli news outlets refused to correct their errors, or
covered them up without acknowledgment.
It so happened that I arrived in Israel for a research trip the day after the flotilla raid. As a result, I was able to do
something which I always thought to be a very basic journalistic practice, so basic it's supposed to be applied routinely:
Asking an implicated party in a story to produce evidence for its claims. What I found bewildering is that at least judging
from Israeli media reports, few, if any, mainstream reporters applied this practice, and when a visiting colleague did their
job for them – nobody bothered to correct or withdraw their original report.
On June 2, the IDF disseminated a press release entitled, ""Attackers of the IDF soldiers found to be Al Qaeda
mercenaries."" The accusation was not accompanied by any conclusive evidence — the IDF reported that Mavi Marmara
passengers were equipped with night-vision goggles (gasp!). This did not stop Yedioth's Ron Ben-Yishai, who was
embedded with the Navy commandos, from amplifying the baseless charge. Citing an ""interrogation"" of Marmara
passengers — ""lynchers,"" he called them — Ben-Yishai wrote the same day, ""Some among the [flotilla passengers] are
believed to have ties with World Jihad groups, mainly Al Qaeda."" The article made no reference to any efforts on part of
Ben Yishai to investigate this claim, nor did he seem to think to ask why the IDF was about to release dangerous
operatives of Osama Bin Laden — presumably they would attack again, wouldn't they? •
On June 3, Israeli journalist Lia Tarachansky of the Real News Network and I placed calls to the IDF Spokesman's Office
to demand further evidence of the Marmara's Al Qaeda ties. We received identical responses from spokespeople from the
IDF's Israel and North America desks: ""We don't have any evidence. The press release was based on information from
the National Security Council."" Hours later, the IDF retracted its claim, changing the title of its press release to, ""Attackers
of IDF Soldiers Found Without Identification Papers."" Despite the official retraction, Ben-Yishai's article remains
uncorrected.
On June 4, the IDF released an audio clip purporting to consist of transmissions between the Mavi Marmara and a Naval
warship. ""Go back to Aushwitz!"" a Marmara passenger shouted, according to the IDF. YNet and Haaretz reported on and
reproduced the audio clip without investigating its authenticity. Forget that the voice uttering the anti-Semitic slur sounded
like a mentally disturbed teenager; had reporters performed a cursory search of the IDF Spokeman's Office website, they
would have found a longer clip released on May 31 that featured a dramatically different exchange with the Marmara with
no mention of Auschwitz. Further, the voice of flotilla organizer Huwaida Arraf was featured in the ""Aushwitz"" clip, yet Arraf
was not aboard the Marmara (she was on the Challenger One). Could the IDF have doctored audio to exploit public
hysteria surrounding the issue of anti-Semitism?
On my blog, I pointed out the discrepancies in the IDF's footage and raised the question of doctoring. The next day, the
IDF conceded that it had in fact doctored the footage, releasing a ""clarification"" and a new clip claiming to consist of the
""full"" exchange between the Navy and the flotilla. Unfortunately, the authenticity of the new clip was impossible to verify.
Despite the IDF's admission, YNet and Haaretz have not corrected their original reports, though Haaretz has at least
altered its headline. Once the doctoring was exposed, the New York Times covered the episode in detail, directing
international attention to the triumph of independent online reporting and the apparent failure of Israel's parochial press
corps.
On June 7, Haaretz's Anshel Pfeffer reported on an IDF press release claiming without evidence that five flotilla
passengers had links to international terror. The press release was larded with highly implausible claims, including that
Ken O'Keefe, who runs an aid organization with Tony Blair's sister-in-law, was planning to train a Hamas commando unit
in the Gaza Strip. When I called the IDF Spokesman's Office, I learned that once again, no evidence was available to
support their press release. ""There is very limited intelligence we can give in this specific case,"" Sgt. Chen Arad told me.
""Obviously I'm unable to give you more information."" Did Pfeffer demand more evidence? If he did and was answered in
the same manner as I did, why did Haaretz publish an unsubstantiated spin as fact?
Joined by Haaretz military correspondents Avi Isacharoff and Amos Harel, Pfeffer became a channel for another daytime
deception by the IDF. On May 31, the three reporters produced an article based exclusively on testimony from Naval
commandos — the flotilla passengers' side of the story was ignored — claiming they had faced live fire and lynching
attempts from Marmara passengers. Since the story was published, the IDF has produced scant evidence to support
either accusation. The article was accompanied by a suspicious photo from the IDF Spokesman's Office depicting a
bearded Muslim man brandishing a knife and surrounded by photojournalists. Daylight beamed in from a window behind
the man. Haaretz's caption, which was sourced to the IDF, asserted that the photo was taken ""after"" the commandos had
boarded the Marmara. However, the commandos raided the ship at night, while the photo was taken during the day. Once
again, the IDF's story was fishy.
I called Sgt. Arad at the IDF Spokesman's Office to investigate. He told me he had no evidence to support the photo's
questionable caption. Soon after our phone conversation, Haaretz quietly altered the caption, removing its claim that the
photo was taken ""after"" the commando raid. For nearly a week, the false photo caption had remained intact. Why did
Haaretz suddenly change it? The only plausible explanation is that the paper received a tip from the IDF Spokesman's
Office. If true, the tip-off suggests a scandalous level of coordination between the Israeli military and the country's media.
In the wake of the flotilla raid, Israeli journalists had a unique opportunity to lead the global media's investigation into the
bloodbath that occurred on the deck of the Mavi Marmara. After all, no one had better access to the military or the
eyewitnesses aboard the flotilla. Instead, too many among the Israeli press corps allowed themselves to be conscripted
into the IDF's hapless information war, leaving the important task of investigating the raid to independent reporters who
remembered to view claims by any nation's military with extreme skepticism.
So why do well-connected, experienced reporters follow the IDF baton so willingly, and fail to follow up when IDF claims
are retracted? Is it simple bias, a desire to present their military in the best possible light, a desire so strong they abandon
their duty to their readers to verify their information? Are they afraid of sanctions, of losing contacts and access to
information? Do they fear personal reprisals? Their readers, and the world media that still relies on Israeli journalism as a
vital source of information, need to know."
5277,"See below — you fine with this?
cdm"
5279,"Am passing on as requested. I will also follow up with Maura O'Neill — I have followed this up before at Amory's request.
AM"
5280,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Wednesday, May 5, 2010 10:54 PM
Mills, Cheryl D
NY meeting
Erica flagged for me, and Bill Burns just called to confirm, that Mottaki has asked the perm reps of the Security Council
to have dinner tomorrow night.
Susan can't attend because she's here in DC but ro oses Alex Wolff attend in her lace.
You can discuss with Bill and Jim in the am, but wanted to flag."
5281,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Wednesday, May 5, 2010 11:00 PM
Re: NY meeting"
5282,Fyi
5283,"Cc: Rodriguez, Miguel E
Ann Stock was just confirmed by the Senate."
5284,I'm on it and will report tomorrow. AM
5285,"OMG!
You are so fabulous!"
5286,"June 26. In London, onwarding to Moscow.... Thought FT interview turned out well even if exposed Dan's ignorance
about airplanes (he doesn't know the difference between a 727 and a 777!)."
5287,"The Runaway General
Stanley McChrystal, Obama's top commander in Afghanistan,
has seized control of the war by never taking his eye off the
real enemy: The wimps in the White House
By Michael Hastings
Jun 22, 2010 10:00 AM EDT
This article originally appeared in RS 1108/1109 from July 8-22, 2010.
'Howed I get screwed into going to this dinner?"" demands Gen. Stanley McChrystal. It's a Thursday night in mid-April,
and the commander of all U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan is sitting in a four-star suite at the HOtel Westminster in
Paris. He's in France to sell his new war strategy to our NATO allies — to keep up the fiction, in essence, that we actually
have allies. Since McChrystal took over a year ago, the Afghan war has become the exclusive property of the United
States. Opposition to the war has already toppled the Dutch government, forced the resignation of Germany's president
and sparked both Canada and the Netherlands to announce the withdrawal of their 4,500 troops. McChrystal is in Paris to
keep the French, who have lost more than 40 soldiers in Afghanistan, from going all wobbly on him.
""The dinner comes with the position, sir,"" says his chief of staff, Col. Charlie Flynn.
McChrystal turns sharply in his chair.
""Hey, Charlie,"" he asks, ""does this come with the position?""
McChrystal gives him the middle finger.
The general stands and looks around the suite that his traveling staff of 10 has converted into a full-scale operations
center. The tables are crowded with silver Panasonic Toughbooks, and blue cables crisscross the hotel's thick carpet,
hooked up to satellite dishes to provide encrypted phone and e-mail communications. Dressed in off-the-rack civilian
casual — blue tie, button-down shirt, dress slacks — McChrystal is way out of his comfort zone. Paris, as one of his
advisers says, is the ""most anti-McChrystal city you can imagine."" The general hates fancy restaurants, rejecting any
place with candles on the tables as too ""Gucci."" He prefers Bud Light Lime (his favorite beer) to Bordeaux, Talladega
Nights (his favorite movie) to Jean-Luc Godard. Besides, the public eye has never been a place where McChrystal felt
comfortable: Before President Obama put him in charge of the war in Afghanistan, he spent five years running the
Pentagon's most secretive black ops.
""What's the update on the Kandahar bombing?"" McChrystal asks Flynn. The city has been rocked by two massive car
bombs in the past day alone, calling into question the general's assurances that he can wrest it from the Taliban.
""We have two KIAs, but that hasn't been confirmed,"" Flynn says.
McChrystal takes a final look around the suite. At 55, he is gaunt and lean, not unlike an older version of Christian Bale in
Rescue Dawn. His slate-blue eyes have the unsettling ability to drill down when they lock on you. If you've fucked up or
disappointed him, they can destroy your soul without the need for him to raise his voice.
""I'd rather have my ass kicked by a roomful of people than go out to this dinner,"" McChrystal says.
He pauses a beat.
""Unfortunately,"" he adds, ""no one in this room could do it.""
With that, he's out the door.
""Who's he going to dinner with?"" I ask one of his aides.
""Some French minister,"" the aide tells me. ""It's fucking gay.""
The next morning, McChrystal and his team gather to prepare for a speech he is giving at the Ecole Militaire, a French
military academy. The general prides himself on being sharper and ballsier than anyone else, but his brashness comes
with a price: Although McChrystal has been in charge of the war for only a year, in that short time he has managed to piss
off almost everyone with a stake in the conflict. Last fall, during the question-and-answer session following a speech he
gave in London, McChrystal dismissed the counterterrorism strategy being advocated by Vice President Joe Biden as
""shortsighted,"" saying it would lead to a state of ""Chaos-istan."" The remarks earned him a smackdown from the president
himself, who summoned the general to a terse private meeting aboard Air Force One. The message to McChrystal
seemed clear: Shut the fuck up, and keep a lower profile
Now, flipping through printout cards of his speech in Paris, McChrystal wonders aloud what Biden question he might get
today, and how he should respond. ""I never know what's going to pop out until I'm up there, that's the problem,"" he says.
Then, unable to help themselves, he and his staff imagine the general dismissing the vice president with a good one-
liner.
""Are you asking about Vice President Biden?"" McChrystal says with a laugh. ""Who's that?""
""Biden?"" suggests a top adviser. ""Did you say: Bite Me?""
When Barack Obama entered the Oval Office, he immediately set out to deliver on his most important campaign
promise on foreign policy: to refocus the war in Afghanistan on what led us to invade in the first place. ""I want the
American people to understand,"" he announced in March 2009. ""We have a clear and focused goal: to disrupt, dismantle
and defeat Al Qaeda in Pakistan and Afghanistan."" He ordered another 21,000 troops to Kabul, the largest increase since
the war began in 2001. Taking the advice of both the Pentagon and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, he also fired Gen. David
McKiernan — then the U.S. and NATO commander in Afghanistan — and replaced him with a man he didn't know and had
met only briefly: Gen. Stanley McChrystal. It was the first time a top general had been relieved from duty during wartime in
more than 50 years, since Harry Truman fired Gen. Douglas MacArthur at the height of the Korean War.
Even though he had voted for Obama, McChrystal and his new commander in chief failed from the outset to connect. The
general first encountered Obama a week after he took office, when the president met with a dozen senior military officials
in a room at the Pentagon known as the Tank. According to sources familiar with the meeting, McChrystal thought Obama
looked ""uncomfortable and intimidated"" by the roomful of military brass. Their first one-on-one meeting took place in the
Oval Office four months later, after McChrystal got the Afghanistan job, and it didn't go much better. ""It was a 10-minute
photo op,"" says an adviser to McChrystal. ""Obama clearly didn't know anything about him, who he was. Here's the guy
who's going to run his fucking war, but he didn't seem very engaged. The Boss was pretty disappointed.""
From the start, McChrystal was determined to place his personal stamp on Afghanistan, to use it as a laboratory for a
controversial military strategy known as counterinsurgency. COIN, as the theory is known, is the new gospel of the
Pentagon brass, a doctrine that attempts to square the military's preference for high-tech violence with the demands of
fighting protracted wars in failed states. COIN calls for sending huge numbers of ground troops to not only destroy the
enemy, but to live among the civilian population and slowly rebuild, or build from scratch, another nation's government — a
process that even its staunchest advocates admit requires years, if not decades, to achieve. The theory essentially
rebrands the military, expanding its authority (and its funding) to encompass the diplomatic and political sides of warfare:
Think the Green Berets as an armed Peace Corps. In 2006, after Gen. David Petraeus beta-tested the theory during his
""surge"" in Iraq, it quickly gained a hardcore following of think-tankers, journalists, military officers and civilian officials.
Nicknamed ""COINdinistas"" for their cultish zeal, this influential cadre believed the doctrine would be the perfect solution
for Afghanistan. All they needed was a general with enough charisma and political savvy to implement it.
As McChrystal leaned on Obama to ramp up the war, he did it with the same fearlessness he used to track down terrorists
in Iraq: Figure out how your enemy operates, be faster and more ruthless than everybody else, then take the fuckers out.
After arriving in Afghanistan last June, the general conducted his own policy review, ordered up by Defense Secretary
Robert Gates. The now-infamous report was leaked to the press, and its conclusion was dire: If we didn't send another
40,000 troops — swelling the number of U.S. forces in Afghanistan by nearly half — we were in danger of ""mission failure.""
The White House was furious. McChrystal, they felt, was trying to bully Obama, opening him up to charges of being weak
on national security unless he did what the general wanted. It was Obama versus the Pentagon, and the Pentagon was
determined to kick the president's ass.
Last fall, with his top general calling for more troops, Obama launched a three-month review to re-evaluate the strategy in
Afghanistan. ""I found that time painful,"" McChrystal tells me in one of several lengthy interviews. ""I was selling an
unsellable position."" For the general, it was a crash course in Beltway politics — a battle that pitted him against
experienced Washington insiders like Vice President Biden, who argued that a prolonged counterinsurgency campaign in
Afghanistan would plunge America into a military quagmire without weakening international terrorist networks. ""The entire
COIN strategy is a fraud perpetuated on the American people,"" says Douglas Macgregor, a retired colonel and leading
critic of counterinsurgency who attended West Point with McChrystal. ""The idea that we are going to spend a trillion
dollars to reshape the culture of the Islamic world is utter nonsense.
In the end, however, McChrystal got almost exactly what he wanted. On December 1st, in a speech at West Point, the
president laid out all the reasons why fighting the war in Afghanistan is a bad idea: It's expensive; we're in an economic
crisis; a decade-long commitment would sap American power; Al Qaeda has shifted its base of operations to Pakistan.
Then, without ever using the words ""victory"" or ""win,"" Obama announced that he would send an additional 30,000 troops
to Afghanistan, almost as many as McChrystal had requested. The president had thrown his weight, however hesitantly,
behind the counterinsurgency crowd.
Today, as McChrystal gears up for an offensive in southern Afghanistan, the prospects for any kind of success look bleak.
In June, the death toll for U.S. troops passed 1,000, and the number of IEDs has doubled. Spending hundreds of billions
of dollars on the fifth-poorest country on earth has failed to win over the civilian population, whose attitude toward U.S.
troops ranges from intensely wary to openly hostile. Thetiggest military operation of the year — a ferocious offensive that
began in February to retake the southern town of Marja — continues to drag on, prompting McChrystal himself to refer to it
as a ""bleeding ulcer."" In June, Afghanistan officially outpaced Vietnam as the longest war in American history — and
Obama has quietly begun to back away from the deadline he set for withdrawing U.S. troops in July of next year. The
president finds himself stuck in something even more insane than a quagmire: a quagmire he knowingly walked into, even
though it's precisely the kind of gigantic, mind-numbing, multigenerational nation-building project he explicitly said he
didn't want.
Even those who support McChrystal and his strategy of counterinsurgency know that whatever the general manages to
accomplish in Afghanistan, it's going to look more like Vietnam than Desert Storm. ""It's not going to look like a win, smell
like a win or taste like a win,"" says Maj. Gen. Bill Mayville, who serves as chief of operations for McChrystal. ""This is going
to end in an argument.""
The night after his speech in Paris, McChrystal and his staff head to Kitty O'Shea's, an Irish pub catering to tourists,
around the corner from the hotel. His wife, Annie, has joined him for a rare visit: Since the Iraq War began in 2003, she
has seen her husband less than 30 days a year. Though it is his and Annie's 33rd wedding anniversary, McChrystal has
invited his inner circle along for dinner and drinks at the ""least Gucci"" place his staff could find. His wife isn't surprised.
""He once took me to a Jack in the Box when I was dressed in formalwear,"" she says with a laugh.
The general's staff is a handpicked collection of killers, spies, geniuses, patriots, political operators and outright maniacs.
There's a former head of British Special Forces, two Navy Seals, an Afghan Special Forces commando, a lawyer, two
fighter pilots and at least two dozen combat veterans and counterinsurgency experts. They jokingly refer to themselves as
Team America, taking the name from the South Park-esque sendup of military cluelessness, and they pride themselves
on their can-do attitude and their disdain for authority. After arriving in Kabul last summer, Team America set about
changing the culture of the International Security Assistance Force, as the NATO-led mission is known. (U.S. soldiers had
taken to deriding ISAF as short for ""I Suck at Fighting"" or ""In Sandals and Flip-Flops."") McChrystal banned alcohol on
base, kicked out Burger King and other symbols of American excess, expanded the morning briefing to include thousands
of officers and refashioned the command center into a Situational Awareness Room, a free-flowing information hub
modeled after Mayor Mike Bloomberg's offices in New York. He also set a manic pace for his staff, becoming legendary
for sleeping four hours a night, running seven miles each morning, and eating one meal a day. (In the month I spend
around the general, I witness him eating only once.) It's a kind of superhuman narrative that has built up around him, a
staple in almost every media profile, as if the ability to go without sleep and food translates into the possibility of a man
single-handedly winning the war.
By midnight at Kitty O'Shea's, much of Team America is completely shitfaced. Two officers do an Irish jig mixed with steps
from a traditional Afghan wedding dance, while McChrystal's top advisers lock arms and sing a slurred song of their own
invention.""Afghanistan!"" they bellow.""Afghanistan!"" They call it their Afghanistan song.
McChrystal steps away from the circle, observing his team. ""All these men,"" he tells me. ""I'd die for them. And they'd die
for me.""
The assembled men may look and sound like a bunch of combat veterans letting off steam, but in fact this tight-knit group
represents the most powerful force shaping U.S. policy in Afghanistan. While McChrystal and his men are in indisputable
command of all military aspects of the war, there is no equivalent position on the diplomatic or political side. Instead, an
assortment of administration players compete over the Afghan portfolio: U.S. Ambassador Karl Eikenberry, Special
Representative to Afghanistan Richard Holbrooke, National Security Advisor Jim Jones and Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton, not to mention 40 or so other coalition ambassadors and a host of talking heads who try to insert themselves into
the mess, from John Kerry to John McCain. This diplomatic incoherence has effectively allowed McChrystal's team to call
the shots and hampered efforts to build a stable and credible government in Afghanistan. ""It jeopardizes the mission,""
says Stephen Biddle, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations who supports McChrystal. ""The military cannot
by itself create governance reform.""
Part of the problem is structural: The Defense Department budget exceeds $600 billion a year, while the State
Department receives only $50 billion. But part of the problem is personal: In private, Team McChrystal likes to talk shit
about many of Obama's top people on the diplomatic side. One aide calls Jim Jones, a retired four-star general and
veteran of the Cold War, a ""clown"" who remains ""stuck in 1985."" Politicians like McCain and Kerry, says another aide,
""turn up, have a meeting with Karzai, criticize him at the airport press conference, then get back for the Sunday talk
shows. Frankly, it's not very helpful."" Only Hillary Clinton receives good reviews from McChrystal's inner circle. ""Hillary
had Stan's back during the strategic review,"" says an adviser. ""She said, 'If Stan wants it, give him what he needs.'""
McChrystal reserves special skepticism for Holbrooke, the official in charge of reintegrating the Taliban. ""The Boss says
he's like a wounded animal,"" says a member of the general's team. ""Holbrooke keeps hearing rumors that he's going to
get fired, so that makes him dangerous. He's a brilliant guy, but he just comes in, pulls on a lever, whatever he can grasp
onto. But this is COIN, and you can't just have someone yanking on shit.""
At one point on his trip to Paris, McChrystal checks his BlackBerry. ""Oh, not another e-mail from Holbrooke,"" he groans. ""I
don't even want to open it."" He clicks on the message and reads the salutation out loud, then stuffs the BladkBerry back in
his pocket, not bothering to conceal his annoyance.
""Make sure you don't get any of that on your leg,"" an aide jokes, referring to the e-mail.
By far the most crucial — and strained — relationship is between McChrystal and Eikenberry, the U.S. ambassador.
According to those close to the two men, Eikenberry — a retired three-star general who served in Afghanistan in 2002 and
2005 — can't stand that his former subordinate is now calling the shots. He's also furious that McChrystal, backed by
NATO's allies, refused to put Eikenberry in the pivotal role of viceroy in Afghanistan, which would have made him the
diplomatic equivalent of the general. The job instead went to British Ambassador Mark Sedwill — a move that effectively
increased McChrystal's influence over diplomacy by shutting out a powerful rival. ""In reality, that position needs to be filled
by an American for it to have weight,"" says a U.S. official familiar with the negotiations.
The relationship was further strained in January, when a classified cable that Eikenberry wrote was leaked to The New
York Times. The cable was as scathing as it was prescient. The ambassador offered a brutal critique of McChrystal's
strategy, dismissed President Hamid Karzai as ""not an adequate strategic partner,"" and cast doubt on whether the
counterinsurgency plan would be ""sufficient"" to deal with Al Qaeda. ""We will become more deeply engaged here with no
way to extricate ourselves,"" Eikenberry warned, ""short of allowing the country to descend again into lawlessness and
chaos.""
McChrystal and his team were blindsided by the cable. ""I like Karl, I've known him for years, but they'd never said
anything like that to us before,"" says McChrystal, who adds that he felt ""betrayed"" by the leak. ""Here's one that covers his
flank for the history books. Now if we fail, they can say, 'I told you so.'""
The most striking example of McChrystal's usurpation of diplomatic policy is his handling of Karzai. It is McChrystal, not
diplomats like Eikenberry or Holbrooke, who enjoys the best relationship with the man America is relying on to lead
Afghanistan. The doctrine of counterinsurgency requires a credible government, and since Karzai is not considered
credible by his own people, McChrystal has worked hard to make him so. Over the past few months, he has accompanied
the president on more than 10 trips around the country, standing beside him at political meetings, or shuras, in Kandahar.
In February, the day before the doomed offensive in Marja, McChrystal even drove over to the president's palace to get
him to sign off on what would be the largest military operation of the year. Karzai's staff, however, insisted that the
president was sleeping off a cold and could not be disturbed. After several hours of haggling, McChrystal finally enlisted
the aid of Afghanistan's defense minister, who persuaded Karzai's people to wake the president from his nap.
This is one of the central flaws with McChrystal's counterinsurgency strategy: The need to build a credible government
puts us at the mercy of whatever tin-pot leader we've backed — a danger that Eikenberry explicitly warned about in his
cable. Even Team McChrystal privately acknowledges that Karzai is a less-than-ideal partner. ""He's been locked up in his
palace the past year,"" laments one of the general's top advisers. At times, Karzai himself has actively undermined
McChrystal's desire to put him in charge. During a recent visit to Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Karzai met three U.S.
soldiers who had been wounded in Uruzgan province. ""General,"" he called out to McChrystal, ""I didn't even know we were
fighting in Uruzgan!""
Growing up as a military brat, McChrystal exhibited the mixture of brilliance and cockiness that would follow him
throughout his career. His father fought in Korea and Vietnam, retiring as a two-star general, and his four brothers all
joined the armed services. Moving around to different bases, McChrystal took solace in baseball, a sport in which he
made no pretense of hiding his superiority: In Little League, he would call out strikes to the crowd before whipping a
fastball down the middle.
McChrystal entered West Point in 1972, when the U.S. military was close to its all-time low in popularity. His class was the
last to graduate before the academy started to admit women. The ""Prison on the Hudson,"" as it was known then, was a
potent mix of testosterone, hooliganism and reactionary patriotism. Cadets repeatedly trashed the mess hall in food fights,
and birthdays were celebrated with a tradition called ""rat fucking,"" which often left the birthday boy outside in the snow or
mud, covered in shaving cream. ""It was pretty out of control,"" says Lt. Gen. David Barno, a classmate who went on to
serve as the top commander in Afghanistan from 2003 to 2005. The class, filled with what Barno calls ""huge talent"" and
""wild-eyed teenagers with a strong sense of idealism,"" also produced Gen. Ray Odierno, the current commander of U.S.
forces in Iraq.
The son of a general, McChrystal was also a ringleader of the campus dissidents — a dual role that taught him how to
thrive in a rigid, top-down environment while thumbing his nose at authority every chance he got. He accumulated more
than 100 hours of demerits for drinking, partying and insubordination — a record that his classmates boasted made him a
""century man."" One classmate, who asked not to be named, recalls finding McChrystal passed out in the shower after
downing a case of beer he had hidden under the sink. The troublemaking almost got him kicked out, and he spent hours
subjected to forced marches in the Area, a paved courtyard where unruly cadets were disciplined. ""I'd come visit, and I'd
end up spending most of my time in the library, while Stan was in the Area,"" recalls Annie, who began dating McChrystal
in 1973.
McChrystal wound up ranking 298 out of a class of 855, a serious underachievement for a man widely regarded as
brilliant. His most compelling work was extracurricular: As managing editor of The Pointer, the West Point literary
magazine, McChrystal wrote seven short stories that eerily foreshadow many of the issues he would confront in his
career. In one tale, a fictional officer complains about the difficulty of training foreign troops to fight; in another, a 19-year-
old soldier kills a boy he mistakes for a terrorist. In ""Brinkman's Note,"" a piece of suspense fiction, the unnamed narrator
appears to be trying to stop a plot to assassinate the president. It turns out, however, that the narrator himself is the
assassin, and he's able to infiltrate the White House: ""The President strode in smiling. From the right coat pocket of the
raincoat I carried, I slowly drew forth my 32-caliber pistol. In Brinkman's failure, I had succeeded.""
After graduation, 2nd Lt. Stanley McChrystal entered an Army that was all but broken in the wake of Vietnam. ""We really
felt we were a peacetime generation,"" he recalls. ""There was the Gulf War, but even that didn't feel like that big of a deal.""
So McChrystal spent his career where the action was: He enrolled in Special Forces school and became a regimental
commander of the 3rd Ranger Battalion in 1986. It was a dangerous position, even in peacetime — nearly two dozen
Rangers were killed in training accidents during the Eighties. It was also an unorthodox career path: Most soldiers who
want to climb the ranks to general don't go into the Rangers. Displaying a penchant for transforming systems he considers
outdated, McChrystal set out to revolutionize the training regime for the Rangers. He introduced mixed martial arts,
required every soldier to qualify with night-vision goggles on the rifle range and forced troops to build up their endurance
with weekly marches involving heavy backpacks.
In the late 1990s, McChrystal shrewdly improved his inside game, spending a year at Harvard's Kennedy School of
Government and then at the Council on Foreign Relations, where he co-authored a treatise on the merits and drawbacks
of humanitarian interventionism. But as he moved up through the ranks, McChrystal relied on the skills he had learned as
a troublemaking kid at West Point: knowing precisely how far he could go in a rigid military hierarchy without getting
tossed out. Being a highly intelligent badass, he discovered, could take you far — especially in the political chaos that
followed September 11th. ""He was very focused,"" says Annie. ""Even as a young officer he seemed to know what he
wanted to do. I don't think his personality has changed in all these years.""
By some accounts, McChrystal's career should have been over at least two times by now. As Pentagon spokesman
during the invasion of Iraq, the general seemed more like a White House mouthpiece than an up-and-coming commander
with a reputation for speaking his mind. When Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld made his infamous ""stuff happens""
remark during the looting of Baghdad, McChrystal backed him up. A few days later, he echoed the president's Mission
Accomplished gaffe by insisting that major combat operations in Iraq were over. But it was during his next stint —
overseeing the military's most elite units, including the Rangers, Navy Seals and Delta Force — that McChrystal took part
in a cover-up that would have destroyed the career of a lesser man.
After Cpl. Pat Tillman, the former-NFL-star-turned-Ranger, was accidentally killed by his own troops in Afghanistan in April
2004, McChrystal took an active role in creating the impression that Tillman had died at the hands of Taliban fighters. He
signed off on a falsified recommendation for a Silver Star that suggested Tillman had been killed by enemy fire.
(McChrystal would later claim he didn't read the recommendation closely enough — a strange excuse for a commander
known for his laserlike attention to minute details.) A week later, McChrystal sent a memo up the chain of command,
specifically warning that President Bush should avoid mentioning the cause of Tillman's death. ""If the circumstances of
Corporal Tillman's death become public,"" he wrote, it could cause ""public embarrassment"" for the president.
""The false narrative, which McChrystal clearly helped construct, diminished Pat's true actions,"" wrote Tillman's mother,
Mary, in her book Boots on the Ground by Dusk. McChrystal got away with it, she added, because he was the ""golden
boy"" of Rumsfeld and Bush, who loved his willingness to get things done, even if it included bending the rules or skipping
the chain of command. Nine days after Tillman's death, McChrystal was promoted to major general.
Two years later, in 2006, McChrystal was tainted by a scandal involving detainee abuse and torture at Camp Nama in
Iraq. According to a report by Human Rights Watch, prisoners at the camp were subjected to a now-familiar litany of
abuse: stress positions, being dragged naked through the mud. McChrystal was not disciplined in the scandal, even
though an interrogator at the camp reported seeing him inspect the prison multiple times. But the experience was so
unsettling to McChrystal that he tried to prevent detainee operations from being placed under his command in
Afghanistan, viewing them as a ""political swamp,"" according to a U.S. official. In May 2009, as McChrystal prepared for
his confirmation hearings, his staff prepared him for hard questions about Camp Nama and the Tillman cover-up. But the
scandals barely made a ripple in Congress, and McChrystal was soon on his way back to Kabul to run the war in
Afghanistan.
The media, to a large extent, have also given McChrystal a pass on both controversies. Where Gen. Petraeus is kind of a
dweeb, a teacher's pet with a Ranger's tab, McChrystal is a snake-eating rebel, a ""Jedi"" commander, as Newsweek called
him. He didn't care when his teenage son came home with blue hair and a mohawk. He speaks his mind with a candor
rare for a high-ranking official. He asks for opinions, and seems genuinely interested in the response. He gets briefings on
his iPod and listens to books on tape. He carries a custom-made set of nunchucks in his convoy engraved with his name
and four stars, and his itinerary often bears a fresh quote from Bruce Lee. (""There are no limits. There are only plateaus,
and you must not stay there, you must go beyond them."") He went out on dozens of nighttime raids during his time in Iraq,
unprecedented for a top commander, and turned up on missions unannounced, with almost no entourage. ""The fucking
lads love Stan McChrystal,"" says a British officer who serves in Kabul. ""You'd be out in Somewhere, Iraq, and someone
would take a knee beside you, and a corporal would be like 'Who the fuck is that?' And it's fucking Stan McChrystal.""
It doesn't hurt that McChrystal was also extremely successful as head of the Joint Special Operations Command, the elite
forces that carry out the government's darkest ops. During the Iraq surge, his team killed and captured thousands of
insurgents, including Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the leader of Al Qaeda in Iraq. ""JSOC was a killing machine,"" says Maj. Gen.
Mayville, his chief of operations. McChrystal was also open to new ways of killing. He systematically mapped out terrorist
networks, targeting specific insurgents and hunting them down — often with the help of cyberfreaks traditionally shunned
by the military. ""The Boss would find the 24-year-old kid with a nose ring, with some fucking brilliant degree from MIT,
sitting in the corner with 16 computer monitors humming,"" says a Special Forces commando who worked with McChrystal
in Iraq and now serves on his staff in Kabul. ""He'd say, 'Hey — you fucking muscleheads couldn't find lunch without help.
You got to work together with these guys.'""
Even in his new role as America's leading evangelist for counterinsurgency, McChrystal retains the deep-seated instincts
of a terrorist hunter. To put pressure on the Taliban, he has upped the number of Special Forces units in Afghanistan from
four to 19. ""You better be out there hitting four or five targets tonight,"" McChrystal will tell a Navy Seal he sees in the
hallway at headquarters. Then he'll add, ""I'm going to have to scold you in the morning for it, though."" In fact, the general
frequently finds himself apologizing for the disastrous consequences of counterinsurgency. In the first four months of this
year, NATO forces killed some 90 civilians, up 76 percent from the same period in 2009 — a record that has created
tremendous resentment among the very population that COIN theory is intent on winning over. In February, a Special
Forces night raid ended in the deaths of two pregnant Afghan women and allegations of a cover-up, and in April, protests
erupted in Kandahar after U.S. forces accidentally shot up a bus, killing five Afghans. ""We've shot an amazing number of
people,"" McChrystal recently conceded.
Despite the tragedies and miscues, McChrystal has issued some of the strictest directives to avoid civilian casualties that
the U.S. military has ever encountered in a war zone. It's ""insurgent math,"" as he calls it — for every innocent person you
kill, you create 10 new enemies. He has ordered convoys to curtail their reckless driving, put restrictions on the use of air
power and severely limited night raids. He regularly apologizes to Hamid Karzai when civilians are killed, and berates
commanders responsible for civilian deaths. ""For a while,"" says one U.S. official, ""the most dangerous place to be in
Afghanistan was in front of McChrystal after a 'civ cas' incident."" The ISAF command has even discussed ways to make
not killing into something you can win an award for: There's talk of creating a new medal for ""courageous restraint,"" a
buzzword that's unlikely to gain much traction in the gung-ho culture of the U.S. military.
But however strategic they may be, McChrystal's new marching orders have caused an intense backlash among his own
troops. Being told to hold their fire, soldiers complain, puts them in greater danger. ""Bottom line?"" says a former Special
Forces operator who has spent years in Iraq and Afghanistan. ""I would love to kick McChrystal in the nuts. His rules of
engagement put soldiers' lives in even greater danger. Every real soldier will tell you the same thing.""
In March, McChrystal traveled to Combat Outpost JFM — a small encampment on the outskirts of Kandahar — to confront
such accusations from the troops directly. It was a typically bold move by the general. Only two days earlier, he had
received an e-mail from Israel Arroyo, a 25-year-old staff sergeant who asked McChrystal to go on a mission with his unit.
""I am writing because it was said you don't care about the troops and have made it harder to defend ourselves,"" Arroyo
wrote.
Within hours, McChrystal responded personally: ""I'm saddened by the accusation that I don't care about soldiers, as it is
something I suspect any soldier takes both personally and professionally — at least I do. But I know perceptions depend
upon your perspective at the time, and I respect that every soldier's view is his own."" Then he showed up at Arroyo's
outpost and went on a foot patrol with the troops — not some bullshit photo-op stroll through a market, but a real live
operation in a dangerous war zone.
Six weeks later, just before McChrystal returned from Paris, the general received another e-mail from Arroyo. A 23-year-
old corporal named Michael Ingram — one of the soldiers McChrystal had gone on patrol with — had been killed by an IED
a day earlier. It was the third man the 25-member platoon had lost in a year, and Arroyo was writing to see if the general
would attend Ingram's memorial service. ""He started to look up to you,"" Arroyo wrote. McChrystal said he would try to
make it down to pay his respects as soon as possible.
The night before the general is scheduled to visit Sgt. Arroyo's platoon for the memorial, I arrive at Combat Outpost JFM
to speak with the soldiers he had gone on patrol with. JFM is a small encampment, ringed by high blast walls and guard
towers. Almost all of the soldiers here have been on repeated combat tours in both Iraq and Afghanistan, and have seen
some of the worst fighting of both wars. But they are especially angered by Ingram's death. His commanders had
repeatedly requested permission to tear down the house where Ingram was killed, noting that it was often used as a
combat position by the Taliban. But due to McChrystal's new restrictions to avoid upsetting civilians, the request had been
denied. ""These were abandoned houses,"" fumes Staff Sgt. Kennith Hicks. ""Nobody was coming back to live in them.""
One soldier shows me the list of new regulations the platoon was given. ""Patrol only in areas that you are reasonably
certain that you will not have to defend yourselves with lethal force,"" the laminated card reads. For a soldier who has
traveled halfway around the world to fight, that's like telling a cop he should only patrol in areas where he knows he won't
have to make arrests. ""Does that make any fucking sense?"" asks Pfc. Jared Pautsch. ""We should just drop a fucking
bomb on this place. You sit and ask yourself: What are we doing here?""
The rules handed out here are not what McChrystal intended — they've been distorted as they passed through the chain of
command — but knowing that does nothing to lessen the anger of troops on the ground. ""Fuck, when I came over here and
heard that McChrystal was in charge, I thought we would get our fucking gun on,"" says Hicks, who has served three tours
of combat. ""I get COIN. I get all that. McChrystal comes here, explains it, it makes sense. But then he goes away on his
bird, and by the time his directives get passed down to us through Big Army, they're all fucked up — either because
somebody is trying to cover their ass, or because they just don't understand it themselves. But we're fucking losing this
thing.""
McChrystal and his team show up the next day. Underneath a tent, the general has a 45-minute discussion with some two
dozen soldiers. The atmosphere is tense. ""I ask you what's going on in your world, and I think it's important for you all to
understand the big picture as well,"" McChrystal begins. ""How's the company doing? You guys feeling sorry for
yourselves? Anybody? Anybody feel like you're losing?"" McChrystal says.
""Sir, some of the guys here, sir, think we're losing, sir,"" says Hicks.
McChrystal nods. ""Strength is leading when you just don't want to lead,"" he tells the men. ""You're leading by example.
That's what we do. Particularly when it's really, really hard, and it hurts inside."" Then he spends 20 minutes talking about
counterinsurgency, diagramming his concepts and principles on a whiteboard. He makes COIN seem like common sense,
but he's careful not to bullshit the men. ""We are knee-deep in the decisive year,"" he tells them. The Taliban, he insists, no
longer has the initiative — ""but I don't think we do, either."" It's similar to the talk he gave in Paris, but it's not winning any
hearts and minds among the soldiers. ""This is the philosophical part that works with think tanks,"" McChrystal tries to joke.
""But it doesn't get the same reception from infantry companies.""
During the question-and-answer period, the frustration boils over. The soldiers complain about not being allowed to use
lethal force, about watching insurgents they detain be freed for lack of evidence. They want to be able to fight — like they
did in Iraq, like they had in Afghanistan before McChrystal. 'We aren't putting fear into the Taliban,"" one soldier says.
""Winning hearts and minds in COIN is a coldblooded thing,"" McChrystal says, citing an oft-repeated maxim that you can't
kill your way out of Afghanistan. ""The Russians killed 1 million Afghans, and that didn't work.""
""I'm not saying go out and kill everybody, sir,"" the soldier persists. ""You say we've stopped the momentum of the
insurgency. I don't believe that's true in this area. The more we pull back, the more we restrain ourselves, the stronger it's
getting.""
""I agree with you,"" McChrystal says. ""In this area, we've not made progress, probably. You have to show strength here,
you have to use fire. What I'm telling you is, fire costs you. What do you want to do? You want to wipe the population out
here and resettle it?""
A soldier complains that under the rules, any insurgent who doesn't have a weapon is immediately assumed to be a
civilian. ""That's the way this game is,"" McChrystal says. ""It's complex. I can't just decide: It's shirts and skins, and we'll kill
all the shirts.""
As the discussion ends, McChrystal seems to sense that he hasn't succeeded at easing the men's anger. He makes one
last-ditch effort to reach them, acknowledging the death of Cpl. Ingram. ""There's no way I can make that easier,"" he tells
them. ""No way I can pretend it won't hurt. No way I can tell you not to feel that. . . . I will tell you, you're doing a great job.
Don't let the frustration get to you."" The session ends with no clapping, and no real resolution. McChrystal may have sold
President Obama on counterinsurgency, but many of his own men aren't buying it.
When it comes to Afghanistan, history is not on McChrystal's side. The only foreign invader to have any success here
was Genghis Khan — and he wasn't hampered by things like human rights, economic development and press scrutiny.
The COIN doctrine, bizarrely, draws inspiration from some of the biggest Western military embarrassments in recent
memory: France's nasty war in Algeria (lost in 1962) and the American misadventure in Vietnam (lost in 1975).
McChrystal, like other advocates of COIN, readily acknowledges that counterinsurgency campaigns are inherently messy,
expensive and easy to lose. ""Even Afghans are confused by Afghanistan,"" he says. But even if he somehow manages to
succeed, after years of bloody fighting with Afghan kids who pose no threat to the U.S. homeland, the war will do little to
shut down Al Qaeda, which has shifted its operations to Pakistan. Dispatching 150,000 troops to build new schools,
roads, mosques and water-treatment facilities around Kandahar is like trying to stop the drug war in Mexico by occupying
Arkansas and building Baptist churches in Little Rock. ""It's all very cynical, politically,"" says Marc Sageman, a former CIA
case officer who has extensive experience in the region. ""Afghanistan is not in our vital interest — there's nothing for us
there.""
In mid-May, two weeks after visiting the troops in Kandahar, McChrystal travels to the White House for a high-level visit by
Hamid Karzai. It is a triumphant moment for the general, one that demonstrates he is very much in command — both in
Kabul and in Washington. In the East Room, which is packed with journalists and dignitaries, President Obama sings the
praises of Karzai. The two leaders talk about how great their relationship is, about the pain they feel over civilian
casualties. They mention the word ""progress"" 16 times in under an hour. But there is no mention of victory. Still, the •
session represents the most forceful commitment that Obama has made to McChrystal's strategy in months. ""There is no
denying the progress that the Afghan people have made in recent years — in education, in health care and economic
development,"" the president says. ""As I saw in the lights across Kabul when I landed — lights that would not have been
visible just a few years earlier.""
It is a disconcerting observation for Obama to make. During the worst years in Iraq, when the Bush administration had no
real progress to point to, officials used to offer up the exact same evidence of success. ""It was one of our first
impressions,"" one GOP official said in 2006, after landing in Baghdad at the height of the sectarian violence. ""So many
lights shining brightly."" So it is to the language of the Iraq War that the Obama administration has turned — talk of
progress, of city lights, of metrics like health care and education. Rhetoric that just a few years ago they would have
mocked. ""They are trying to manipulate perceptions because there is no definition of victory — because victory is not even
defined or recognizable,"" says Celeste Ward, a senior defense analyst at the RAND Corporation who served as a political
adviser to U.S. commanders in Iraq in 2006. ""That's the game we're in right now. What we need, for strategic purposes, is
to create the perception that we didn't get run off. The facts on the ground are not great, and are not going to become
great in the near future.""
But facts on the ground, as history has proven, offer little deterrent to a military determined to stay the course. Even those
closest to McChrystal know that the rising anti-war sentiment at home doesn't begin to reflect how deeply fucked up things
are in Afghanistan. ""If Americans pulled back and started paying attention to this war, it would become even less popular,""
a senior adviser to McChrystal says. Such realism, however, doesn't prevent advocates of counterinsurgency from
dreaming big: Instead of beginning to withdraw troops next year, as Obama promised, the military hopes to ramp up its
counterinsurgency campaign even further. ""There's a possibility we could ask for another surge of U.S. forces next
summer if we see success here,"" a senior military official in Kabul tells me.
Back in Afghanistan, less than a month after the White House meeting with Karzai and all the talk of ""progress,""
McChrystal is hit by the biggest blow to his vision of counterinsurgency. Since last year, the Pentagon had been planning
to launch a major military operation this summer in Kandahar, the country's second-largest city and the Taliban's original
home base. It was supposed to be a decisive turning point in the war — the primary reason for the troop surge that
McChrystal wrested from Obama late last year. But on June 10th, acknowledging that the military still needs to lay more
groundwork, the general announced that he is postponing the offensive until the fall. Rather than one big battle, like
Fallujah or Ramadi, U.S. troops will implement what McChrystal calls a ""rising tide of security."" The Afghan police and
army will enter Kandahar to attempt to seize control of neighborhoods, while the U.S. pours $90 million of aid into the city
to win over the civilian population.
Even proponents of counterinsurgency are hard-pressed to explain the new plan. ""This isn't a classic operation,"" says a
U.S. military official. ""It's not going to be Black Hawk Down. There aren't going to be doors kicked in."" Other U.S. officials
insist that doors are going to be kicked in, but that it's going to be a kinder, gentler offensive than the disaster in Marja.
""The Taliban have a jackboot on the city,"" says a military official. ""We have to remove them, but we have to do it in a way
that doesn't alienate the population."" When Vice President Biden was briefed on the new plan in the Oval Office, insiders
say he was shocked to see how much it mirrored the more gradual plan of counterterrorism that he advocated last fall.
""This looks like CT-plus!"" he said, according to U.S. officials familiar with the meeting.
Whatever the nature of the new plan, the delay underscores the fundamental flaws of counterinsurgency. After nine years
of war, the Taliban simply remains too strongly entrenched for the U.S. military to openly attack. The very people that
COIN seeks to win over — the Afghan people — do not want us there. Our supposed ally, President Karzai, used his
influence to delay the offensive, and the massive influx of aid championed by McChrystal is likely only to make things
worse. ""Throwing money at the problem exacerbates the problem,"" says Andrew Wilder, an expert at Tufts University who
has studied the effect of aid in southern Afghanistan. ""A tsunami of cash fuels corruption, delegitimizes the government
and creates an environment where we're picking winners and losers"" — a process that fuels resentment and hostility
among the civilian population. So far, counterinsurgency has succeeded only in creating a never-ending demand for the
primary product supplied by the military: perpetual war. There is a reason that President Obama studiously avoids using
the word ""victory"" when he talks about Afghanistan. Winning, it would seem, is not really possible. Not even with
Stanley McChrystal in charge.
This article originally appeared in RS 1108/1109 from July 8-22, 2010."
5288,"W I'll send you details later
Sent from my iPad
On 15 Jun 2010, at 02:37, ""H"" <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> I would be happy to meet w hiim. How should I follow up to arrange a mutually agreeable time? All the best to you.
>"
5289,"Yes, it works well -- I will follow up with her office.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
B6"
5290,Fyi
5291,Yes I am. Huma is here too
5292,"Will do.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
direct)"
5294,"RELEASE IN PART
B6
Gert: thank you for sending the letter to
retirement.
on the occasion of her
flew in to surprise her at the luncheon. It was a great day
all around for a great lady. Thanks again. B"
5295,"FYI. Thanks again for signing the book ---- and I do hope you get royalties from Mongolia! Also thought you would like to
see the attached letter to President Clinton."
5297,"Westewelle cannot do call at 7:30.
Holbrooke says he needs to talk to you"
5298,"How about arranging a phone call between the two of you first to discuss the issues briefly then you could agree
mutually when to meet.
If you give me a time when you can take a quick phone call from the Crown Prince I will get the number for you to ring.
Cherie Blair"
5299,FYI — see traffic below mine.
5300,Ok.
5301,"Lona Valmoro
t to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
5302,"You are scheduled to meet with the Danish Foreign Minister on Friday. The Danes are interested in partnering with the
US on a side event at the Kabul
Conference focused on Afghan women. I think this has potential and I'll raise with SRAP, but wanted you to know -- in
case it comes up in your meeting.
When I met with a couple of the Afghan women who participated in the recent peace jirga, they told me that it would
send a very strong message if a large group of women representing Afghan civil society could meet with you when you
are in Kabul for the conference. I don't know if it will be possible to arrange such a large gathering, but perhaps
something significant can be arranged.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
5303,"Cheryl and I discussed how to do an effective strategy session. Monday early afternoon is the first clear shot we have at
getting the right group of people in the room together for an extended period of time.
We propose to start the discussion from the following premise: We've addressed, in one fashion or another, to one
degree of satisfaction or another, most of the major items we set out at the beginning of last near. We've moved the
needle, but we haven't changed the game. Now the question is, what are the major milestones over the next 12-18
months? What should we be aiming at? And especially, what are some potential game-changers — moves that would
shift the global landscape in meaningful and long-lasting ways?
Everything will be on the table — regional issues, transnational issues, etc. Everyone should read the book of look-ahead
papers; identify things they think we should pursue; and add ideas — especially creative and far-reaching ideas — on top
of what's contained in them.
We propose the following roster:
Jim
Jack
Bill
AMS
Derek
CDM
Jake
Rich
Kurt
Judith
Harold
Let us know what you think.
Jake"
5304,"From Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Tuesday, June 15, 2010 1:27 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Remarks to participants at High Level Meeting on Food Security for All
1/26/09
S. Remarks to participants at High Level Meeting on Food Security for All
President Obama has made clear that alleviating hunger worldwide is a top priority of this Administration. As he said on
the first day of his Presidency, ""to the people of poor nations, we pledge to work alongside you to make your farms
flourish and let clean waters flow; to nourish starved bodies and feed hungry minds."" The President and I intend to focus
new attention on food security so that developing nations can invest in food production, affordability, accessibility,
education and technology.
http://www.state.gov/secretary/rm/2009a/01/115585.htm"
5305,"Reines, Philippe I
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 3:41 PM
H
Valmoro, Lona J; Hanley, Monica R
Tonight
So DS will take you from the WH"
5306,"Afghanistan
FYL
Statement by Ambassador Mark Sedwill, NATO's Senior Civilian Representative to Afghanistan
Stan McChrystal is one of the finest men I have ever known. He is and will remain a lifelong
friend.
General McChrystal has also been an outstanding military commander who was pivotal in
creating and driving forward NATO's strategy in Afghanistan to regain the initiative against
the insurgency, resolve the political tensions which fuel it and transition responsibility to the
Government of Afghanistan as we help build their capabilities.
This strategy remains the basis of the campaign. The campaign remains on course. The
Afghan people should have no doubt of our commitment to build a stable Afghanistan and a
safer world.
I look forward to working with General David Petraeus whose remarkable track record speaks
for itself. He will provide the continuity and strong leadership required to meet the challenges
ahead.
Dominic Medley
SCR Spokesman/Media Advisor
medlev.dominic@hq.nato.int
dominic.medlev@hq.isaf.nato.int
+93 793 38 4008"
5307,"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 5:06 PM
FW:
FYI on"
5308,FYI
5309,"Now hearing that If you that's great - same plan. If you
come back to office, just need to tell Huma what you would have told her via email, that you're skipping the concert
Again, your tickets and concert plans will not be altered, we've assured that can't happen"
5310,"Overall the speech is worth reading; if you like I'll have it put in your weekend book. 2 passages
particularly worth noting.
1. ""Across the Atlantic, Hilary Clinton has pledged to put women 'front and center' of the American development
agenda. That is the right choice. As David Cameron and Jeff Sachs argued earlier this year, women can hold the
key to development in the world's poorest countries — in education, enterprise, micro-finance and healthcare.
Investing in women pays dividends throughout the entire community.""
2. ""I see DFID as a key, joined-up, integrated department, a bright star in the Whitehall constellation, a department
of state for development in the developing world. That's why DFID has a seat at the Cabinet table and it's why I
won't be satisfied until our message rings down the corridors of each and every department in Whitehall.""
We obviously don't love the ""dept of state for development language,"" but what is most
noteworthy is his emphasis on ""joined-up"" and ""integrated"" dept — underlining the fact that
DFID as a separate cabinet department has been almost divorced from the rest of the
government.
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
5311,ok sounds good.
5312,do I have the plan right?
5313,"also, IF you want to do any foreign/mccrystal calls:
- frattini can talk now (till 6pm)
- cannon can talk after 7pm
rest will have to be tomorrow (if we do them at all)"
5314,fyi
5315,"Valmoro, Lona J <VaIrnoroU@state.gov>
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 5:58 PM
preines
Hanley, Monica R
Re: Tonight
Lona Valmoro
S ecial Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
5316,"PIR <preines _
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 6:51 PM
H; Lona Valmoro
'hanleymr@state.gov'
Re: Tonight
Where did you say you are going?"
5317,"PIR <preines
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 6:54 PM
H; Lona Valmoro
'hanleymr@state.gov'
Re: Tonight
Huma still at your house?"
5318,"Bagley and Tauscher are all set with their tickets.
Mikulski will get here close to your arrival time so you might walk in with her - pls let me know if that's a problem.
Pelosi is coming separately and is seated close to you."
5319,Thanks. Tauscher here. Mikulski around the corner. Will see you soon.
5320,"I am currently traveling outside of the country with limited access to email. If you need immediate assistance, please
contact Nora Toiv (ToivNF@state.gov) or Joanne Laszczych, (Laszczychi@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
If it is an emergency after business hours, please reach out to our Operations Center to have them reach me.
Thank you
cdm"
5321,"http://www.salon.com/news/bill_clinton/index.html?story=/politics/war_room/2010/06/23/bill_clinton_world_cup
Wednesday, Jun 23, 2010 14:22 ET
PIVar Room
Bill Clinton to U.S. soccer team: ""You are amazing!""
By Joe Conason
•
AP/Michael Sohn
Former President Bill Clinton at the World Cup group C soccer match between the United States and Algeria in Pretoria,
South Africa on Wednesday
Salon's Joe Conason is traveling with Bill Clinton in Africa this week and was with the former president at today's U.S.
World Cup soccer game in Pretoria. He filed this report:
Minutes after Landon Donovan scored the stunning extra-time goal that won a critical World Cup match against Algeria,
Bill Clinton and several of his aides and friends (including former Democratic National Committee Chairman Terry
McAuliffe) were escorted downstairs to the U.S. team's locker room. The American players roared with pride as the former
president (and honorary chairman of the committee bidding to bring the World Cup to the U.S. in 2018 or 2022) walked in.
After a round of embraces, handshakes and high fives, he spoke briefly about his joy in their victory: ""I'm proud of you
because you didn't let the frustration of all the shots that you almost made get you down. You are amazing!""
Much posing for pictures ensued with the shirtless, whooping, chest-bumping players -- who couldn't quite seem to
believe they had done it.
The team then invited Clinton alone to join them in the inner locker room, where he could be glimpsed toasting them with
a beer amid much additional hollering. When he emerged 10 minutes or so later, he had a broad smile and a hoarse
voice.
As Clinton left for Johannesburg, where he will meet tomorrow with former President Nelson Mandela, one of the players
chased him out into the hall and handed one of the former president's aides an official ball signed by all the members of
Team USA.
Clinton stopped for just a moment to talk with the local press before disappearing in a convoy of flashing lights and sirens.
""If it hadn't been the decisive game, even I would have said it should have been a tie,"" he said. ""It was a great game. You
know, all great contests become head games at some point -- sports, elections, wars. And they [Team USA] have good
heads and good hearts."""
5322,Sorry to confirm they are not in.
5323,"Copying Rich -- I cannot explain. He was with us until 6 pm yesterday when he reached the conclusion that it would
bring down the rule."
5324,"Berman went to the leadership meeting yesterday to make his case for fees - that's what they must be referring to. It
was after that meeting that the blue dogs and hoyer told him no."
5325,Fyi
5326,"Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR©state.gov>
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 10:41 PM
Huma Abedin
She unfortunately can't come this week - she's away until Tuesday. Will see if Tuesday night or Wednesday morning
works with your schedule."
5327,"Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR@state.gov>
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 10:41 PM
Re:
Yes she's in Hawaii until Tuesday morning. She can do Tuesday evening ot Wednesday if that works for you"
5328,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, June 17, 2010 8:42 AM
Abedin, Huma; Verma, Richard R
Gaza language"
5329,"FYI
McHale, Judith A <McHaIeJA©state.goy>
Thursday, June 17, 2010 11:56 AM
Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
FW: Pew Global Attitudes 22-Nation Poll"
5330,NOTE TO HRC...
5332,For: Hillary
5334,"Haley posted this today on website:
Another Good Visit
Posted 26 minutes ago"
5335,"May 7, 2010 — Ben Rhodes briefing:
""We've identified July 2011 as the beginning point of a transition to an Afghan lead in certain instances.
Again, the reductions that will follow July 2011 will be based upon conditions on the ground."""
5336,FYI — on Jackon/Vanik re: Russia. Will send more information as we get it.
5337,Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry
5338,"I am on travel and will not return to the office until Tuesday, July 6. If you need immediate assistance please contact
Marisa McAuliffe by phone at 202-647-2972 or email at McauliffeMS@state.gov."
5339,"8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am PARTY FOR DAN SMITH
9:30 am Treaty Room, 7.Floor
9:30 am WEEKLY MEETING w/UN AMBASSADOR SUSAN RICE
10:00 am Secretary's Office
10:15 am WORLD REFUGEE DAY EVENT
10:25 am Benjamin Franklin Room, eFloor *Approx. 200 ppl expected.
10:45 am BILATERAL w/DANISH DPM/FM LENE ESPERSEN
11:15 am Secretary's Conference Room *Official photo in East Hall preceding.
11:15 am PRESS PRE-BRIEF
11:20 am Secretary's Office
11:20 am JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/DANISH DPM/FM ESPERSEN
11:35 am Treaty Room
11:40 am OFFICE TIME
12:00 pm Secretary's Office
12:00 pm DEPART State Department *En route NFATC
12:15 pm ARRIVE NFATC
12:15 pm DEDICATION CEREMONY TO MARK THE EXPANSION OF
1:00 pm FOREIGN SERVICE INSTITUTE/GEORGE P. SHULTZ CENTER
National Foreign Affairs Training Center *Approx. 500 ppl expected.
1:05 pm DEPART NFATC *En route Washington National Airport
1:20 pm ARRIVE Washington National Airport
2:00 pm DEPART Washington National Airport
*En route New York, NY
3:25 pm ARRIVE New York, LaGuardia Airport
3:35 pm DEPART New York, LaGuardia Airport *En route Private Residence
4:20 pm ARRIVE Private Residence"
5340,"Hope it's helpful, Horton is very well informed and trustworthy"
5342,Importance: High
5343,"Just met with Fr Gudziak. He will come back to Kyiv for your visit!
Also John Tefft saw him in Lviv. He is so grateful for the strong support you have delivered.
Sent via BlackBerry from T-Mobile"
5344,"Think we came to a resolution on government procurement, and civ nuke. Jury is still out on shoulds/shalls."
5345,"8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am OFFICE TIME
10:00 am Secretary's Office
10:00 am PRIVATE MEETING
10:10 am Secretary's Office
10:15 am BRIEFING ON GLOBAL HEALTH INITIATIVE ISSUES
11:15 am Secretary's Outer Office
11:30 am WEEKLY DEVELOPMENT TEAM MEETING
12:30 pm Secretary's Outer Office
12:30 pm OFFICE TIME
1:15 pm Secretary's Office
1:20 pm DEPART State Department
En route Washington Reagan National Airport
1:40 pm ARRIVE Washington Reagan National Airport
2:00 pm DEPART Washington Reagan National Airport via US Airways Shuttle #2174
En route New York, NY
3:25 pm ARRIVE New York, New York-LaGuardia Airport
3:35 pm DEPART New York-LaGuardia Airport
En route Private Residence
4:25 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
#:#4"
5346,"FYI
I think we need smart ways to get one or two more folks in — like — Dan Baer and few others like that."
5347,You fine with this for the P meeting on Monday— scroll down for all invitees.
5348,fvi
5349,Let me see what dates might work for this group.
5350,We are going to postpone Monday's and start with tues or weds.
5351,"We sent the paper on consular fees to Tanner today, and his staff confirmed that he has received
it. Assuming Tanner continues to be supportive, we need him to let Hoyer know he supports our effort.
Additionally, Jack thinks it is important for you to talk to Pelosi. Berman mentioned that as well. I can send a
call sheet just in case you have a chance to connect with her.
Thanks again for stopping by the AIPAC meeting. It really helped close out some important issues."
5352,Fyi traffic
5353,"Dan will stay through Monday to work
The next step would be to work toi"
5354,"Below is the update I have as of yesterday - still waiting on today's update and Dan is working the language on a number
of points. I will get you the latest either late tonight or tomorrow morning.
Based on our discussions so far,
DRAFT STATEMENT
DISCUSSION
ANALYSIS
For us, there is merit"
5355,"See hus analysis of where we are on EAS but also on the US, Japan, and Chinese urbanization and trade patterns..
Nothing that new, but valuable coming from him.
The Australian - 19 Jun 10
Embracing everyone from the US to India Greg Sheridan, Foreign editor
GEORGE Yeo, Singapore's Foreign Minister, is one of the most dazzlingly clever people you could meet in Southeast
Asia. Singapore is a society that notoriously produces hardheads in its strategic outlook. But Yeo combines Singapore's
characteristic hard-headedness with a depth of historical understanding and context, as well as a lively human sympathy
for the diversity of the region that surrounds him, which I, at any event, find almost unique. I remember interviewing
him at the height of the East Asian economic crisis in 1997 and asking whether this crisis shattered the idea of Asia as
the growing centre of the global economy, as numerous foolishly triumphalist Western commentators were then
suggesting. ""No it doesn't,"" Yeo told me. ""At the most it might put back the forecasts by five or 10 years."" It moved the
graph a little to the right, it didn't change the trends. On that, Yeo was absolutely right.
But it is also Yeo's ability to apply the insights of history to the real problems of Asia today which make him formidable.
This week, Yeo spent a few days in Australia and I caught up with him for one of those slightly mesmerising historical
tour de force conversations in which he specialises.
It is no secret Singapore had the most serious reservations about Kevin Rudd's proposal to establish an Asia-Pacific
Community. The Prime Minister wanted the US, India and Russia included in a regional body which could deal with
strategic issues as well as trade and economics. Singapore's hesitation over the Rudd proposal came because it thought
that the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, of which it is a key member, could be sidelined. I asked Yeo whether the
region was now clear on what it wanted its organisations to accomplish. ""We still need a lot more discussion,"" he said.
""The vision is going to change dramatically, with the emergence of China and India on the global stage. The
configuration is evolving much faster than most of us would have preferred. But that's the reality we've got to work
with.
We need a regional architecture which is able to accommodate the stresses. The single most important relationship is
between the US and China. Increasingly, the relationship between India and China is becoming more important. I think
eventually a triangular relationship will decide the big issues of war and peace in Asia this century - the triangle
consisting of the US, China and India.""
Yeo saw Rudd and Foreign Minister Stephen Smith in Canberra and now describes Canberra and Singapore as being in
harmony on the evolution of regional organisations. This is how he saw it having played out: ""When Prime Minister Rudd
proposed the APC, Dick Woolcott (Rudd's envoy) went round the region. He did not visit all countries. He made it quite
plain to some that only the big countries of ASEAN need to be involved. We talked among ourselves and quite soon the
conclusion was reached that ASEAN was going to be sidelined. So there was an immediate blowback from the region.
""To PM Rudd's credit he quickly clarified this, that ASEAN is central to his conception of the APC and that that was his
vision from the very beginning. I said, 'All of us in the region are very relieved to hear that'.
""Separately we had (former Japanese) prime minister (Yukio) Hatoyama articulating his view of an East Asian region
apparently centred on China, Japan and Korea. It created, as you would expect, a natural reaction in Southeast Asia. That
got us all thinking in the region. How to keep Russia and the US in the region in a way that's comfortable. For a long time
we've been thinking about China, more recently about India."" Yeo pointed out that earlier regional organisations also
evolved slowly, in particular the East Asia Summit, which includes Australia and New Zealand, as well as ASEAN, China,
Japan, South Korea and India. He said: ""It took us a long time to create the EAS structure. Some preferred it to be based
on the ASEAN plus three (China, Japan, Korea), harking back to (former Malaysian prime minister) Mahathir
(Mohamad)'s East Asian caucus. ""Others felt that's too limiting. If it's just ASEAN plus three, that may be a little lop-sided
because of the economic weight of the plus three. So we thought if we have India on one side, and Australia and New
Zealand to the south, there's a certain natural equipoise.
""Then it took many discussions. The Russians wanted to join the EAS but we felt this should not be rushed. Russia is too
important a country. There was some unhappiness from the Russians that we did not accommodate them in the EAS at
that time. (Former US) President (George W.) Bush did not want to join the EAS but he worried that the EAS might
exclude the US from the region. We told our American friends that it could not be purely an Asian thing because
Australia and New Zealand were in it. In any case, countries like Singapore would never want an EAS to be exclusive.
What would threaten us most is if the world developed into blocs.""
So where do we end up today? ""When I met PM Rudd I thanked him for helping to catalyse the thinking of ASEAN. So
now there are two possibilities, either an EAS expanded for Russia and the US or a separate ASEAN plus eight (including
the US and Russia) configuration. In fact I had a very interesting discussion with Prime Minister Rudd. I think in the end
he's happy to let ASEAN members decide and he doesn't want to interfere in our regional discussion.""
So you can describe what Yeo outlines as either a win or a loss for Rudd. Whatever evolves, nobody is going to call it the
Asia-Pacific Community and no one is going to imagine that Rudd was its founder, as everyone accepts that Bob Hawke
founded APEC in 1989. On the other hand, it does seem as though it's very much more than likely that there will finally
be a regional organisation embracing everyone from the US to India, which is able to discuss security. That is pretty
much Rudd's policy aim and, as Yeo constructively puts it, Rudd has influenced ASEAN thinking. Friends of Rudd can
describe it as the embodiment of his vision and fulfilment of his initiative. His enemies can say the APC came to nothing
and was a failure in Australian diplomacy. Certainly Yeo casts it in a constructive light. There is only space to give the
smallest sampling of Yeo's prodigiously rich insights on other issues.
On the US, he said: ""Both Australia and Singapore feel it in our bones that the US will remain a great power for many
decades. It is a vast country always throwing up new ideas, always on the boil. It has a sunny disposition. We in
Singapore and Australia feel it in our bones that one way or another they will get out of their current difficulties.""
On China, I asked whether its political development was keeping pace with its growth in power, financial and military, so
it could manage that new power in a way that was beneficial to everybody. Yeo stressed that he was sure Beijing's
preoccupations were internal, and said: ""China is the No 1 trading partner for Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, India
and already No 2 for New Zealand, and for all the countries (in Asia) the graph points in the same direction.""
(The historical process) is high drama in China. It was historically because of the large rural peasantry that Maoism
developed as a different ideology from Bolshevism. China was 20 per cent urban. It's now 40 per cent urban and will go
to 80 per cent or 90 per cent. The urbanisation of Europe was languid by comparison, but look at Dickens or Victor Hugo.
Look at the huge reaction in Europe to urbanisation and industrialisation. In China it's all compressed. If they succeed
they will be the greatest nation on Earth. The Chinese know they have to learn new tricks. The skills which brought them
to power won't keep them in power.""
He recalled that early in China's economic modernisation program it was fascinated by how Singapore, as a mostly
Chinese nation, ran its society in such an orderly and effective manner, combining rapid economic growth with social
order and a respect for tradition. Then that interest seemed to wane. But now Chinese delegations are back again in
large numbers, fascinated particularly with how Singapore manages the politics of being a big and booming
city. Mainland Chinese are even sitting in on politicians' electoral clinics in Singapore, observing how real problems are
recognised, integrated into the system and dealt with.
I asked Yeo too whether he thought Japan could sustain the stabilising role it has played in Asia these past 60 years. He
replied: ""Their politics now are a mess. Partly because they fit the pieces together so closely, reconfiguring the pieces is-
difficult. A lot of Japanese politics now is not about fitting the pieces together but pulling them apart.
""The DP1 came to power determined to pull the pieces apart, the Liberal Democratic Party from big business from the
bureacracy. Never write Japan off. It takes a long time for them to change but when they do change they do it with a
fury and intensity that surprises everyone."" Japan has gone through profound periods of change in the past - the Meiji
Restoration of the 19th century, in which it decided to become a modern nation; or the pervasive change after World
War II, in which it decided to embrace democracy and the role of the key US ally in the region. The fact that it is now
grappling with change is no reason to think it cannot emerge again with a successful model.
Yeo is an old, old friend of Australia, and in a sense a long-term champion of Australia's involvement in Southeast Asia.
He has been a minister in the Singapore government for more than 20 years. He embodies a great deal of institutional
memory and strategic continuity, not just within Singapore but within the broader councils of the region.
It's just a pity he doesn't visit us a bit more often."
5356,Fyi
5357,Attached is the PPD.
5359,We had brief conversation about it with paul a while ago but we didn't know how early conf would start.
5360,"Just sent oscar call sheets for nita lowey and greek fm papandraeou for you.
I think jake may have told you the aide to the Greek Minister of Citizens Protection was killed in the protests earlier this
week. EUR has made request that you place a condolence call to FM Papandreou this weekend. The week is going to be
tough politically and personally for the FM. The Minister of Citizens Protection has resigned as a result of the protests
and deaths. let me know if u want to.
Also, we have abdullah call for either tomorrow or monday. Waiting fo them to get back to us."
5362,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, June 27, 2010 6:48 AM
Re: With deep gratitude"
5363,Absolutely.
5364,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, June 27, 2010 10:35 AM
H: memo on UK politics/budget/economy Sid
hrc memo uk politialeconomy 062710.docx
June 27, 2010
For: HRC"
5365,AdlerCE@state.gov
5366,Great - I will work with Claire to find a good time. Enjoy the rest of your weekend!
5367,Ok
5368,"No date from slim.
We will follow up on all"
5369,"Me, too. On Oz.
On UK, been in touch with people, more this coming week. With Labour leadership contest going through summer there's
no real opposition, which is just as well, let Cameron/Clegg dig their own hole. Labour needs a new face after Gordon.
Lots of internal tensions inside LDs, will only get worse. They are seen as the enablers. This can't be sustained. This
budget isn't the end either. College tuition probably to double this fall, among other new measures."
5370,"Hilary can you give me a telephone number the Qatar Crown Prince can ring you on and he will get in touch.
Alternatively I can get his personal phone number for you. What is the best for you?
Cherie Blair"
5371,"In case you want to connect directly
Otherwise lauren can track for you"
5372,Reminder
5373,"Lowey to Remove Assistance for Afghanistan From Foreign Aid Bill
Chairwoman Announces Oversight Hearings on Corruption in Afghanistan
WASHINGTON — In light of two troubling news reports on corruption within the Afghan government, Congresswoman
Nita Lowey (D-NY), Chairwoman of the Appropriations State and Foreign Operations Subcommittee, today announced
she is removing funding for Afghanistan beyond humanitarian aid from her 2011 bill scheduled for markup this week.
""The alleged shipment of billions in donor funds out of Afghanistan and allegations of Afghan government insiders
impeding corruption investigations are outrageous,"" said Lowey. ""I do not intend to appropriate one more dime for
assistance to Afghanistan until I have confidence that U.S. taxpayer money is not being abused to line the pockets of
corrupt Afghan government officials, drug lords, and terrorists. Furthermore, the government of Afghanistan must
demonstrate that corruption is being aggressively investigated and prosecuted.
""Rampant corruption fosters the conditions that threaten the security of our troops and the stability of the Afghan
government and economy.""
The State and Foreign Operations Appropriations Subcommittee will mark up its Fiscal Year 2011 Appropriations Act on
Wednesday June 30th. The subcommittee will not consider any bilateral assistance for the Afghan government other
than lifesaving humanitarian aid at this time.
Lowey also announced the Subcommittee will hold oversight hearings after the July 4th recess to get to the bottom of
these allegations.
""Too many Americans are suffering in this economy for us to put their hard-earned tax dollars into the hands of
criminals overseas,"" said Lowey. ""We will not commit billions more in taxpayer money for Afghanistan until there are
assurances that such funds will be used for their intended purposes and that the government of Afghanistan is willing
and able to root corruption within its ranks. U.S. taxpayers deserve nothing less."""
5374,"Will do.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
5377,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, May 6, 2010 3:18 PM
FW: Luis Alberto Moreno"
5378,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, May 6, 2010 5:12 PM
H
Items
1. You asked about Kurt's visit to Burma. He's set to go in three days. I talked to Jim about it today,
2. You also asked about IRS assessments of tax delinquency at State.
3. Crai and the Cuba team are working something up
4."
5379,"Frank Ricciardone came to see me several weeks ago to make the case for
AM"
5380,"Projection from exit of 305 tory seats, 326 majority, LibDems underperforming at 61 in exit. Informed people don't
believe exit, going to be counted out district by district into tomorrow. Tories and Murdoch will try to drive Gordon out
though they lack majority, will say he's repudiated, must concede. Gordon may reach out to Clegg, don't know. Shaun
talked to Alastait Campbell about it yesterday, Alistair working with Gordon. Will likely be protracted and increasingly
devisive, like Florida. More to come soon...
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
5381,"Cristophe is coming tomorrow at 7:30, not Isabelle. Let me know who you want wednesday cause he's offered to come
then too."
5382,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA©state.gov>
Thursday, May 6, 2010 7:18 PM
Sullivan, JacobJ
The political ramifications of the Greek/European debt crisis
As you know, the EU-IMF-USG consensus hope motivating the Greek bailout is that it will buy time for Spain, Portugal,
etc. From widening credit spreads to falling stock prices, most relevant market indicators are responding with doubt.
Former IMF Chief Economist and NYT Columnist (and influential blogger for bond traders) Simon Johnson has an
important rejoinder to this consensus hope in today's NYT, full text pasted below.
As the EU has no playbook for most of the pressing questions it faces, my staff is working to
brainstorm as to the least bad of what are only sobering options.
This is long but worth it.
May 6, 2010, 6:11 amIt's Not About Greece AnymoreBy PETER BOONE AND SIMON JOHNSONLouisa Gouliamaki/Agence
France-Presse — Getty Images Protesters waved flags from the Acropolis archaeological site behind banners in English
and Greek hung in front of the Parthenon temple in Athens.Peter Boone is chairman of the charity Effective Intervention
and a research associate at the Center for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics. He is also a
principal in Salute Capital Management Ltd. Simon Johnson, the former chief economist at the International Monetary
Fund, is the co-author of ""13 Bankers.""The Greek ""rescue"" package announced last weekend is dramatic, unprecedented
and far from enough to stabilize the euro zone.The Greek government and the European Union leadership, prodded by
the International Monetary Fund, are finally becoming realistic about the dire economic situation in Greece. They have
abandoned previous rounds of optimistic forecasts and have now admitted to a profoundly worse situation. This new
program calls for ""fiscal adjustments"" — cuts to the fiscal deficit, mostly through spending cuts — totaling 11 percent of
gross domestic product in 2010, 4.3 percent in 2011, and 2 percent in 2012 and 2013. The total debt-to-G.D.P. ratio
peaks at 149 percent in 2012-13 before starting a gentle glide path back down to sanity.This new program is honest
enough to show why it is unlikely to succeed.Daniel Gros, an eminent economist on euro zone issues based in Brussels,
has argued that for each 1 percent of G.D.P. decline in Greek government spending, total demand in the country falls by
2.5 percent of G.D.P. If the government reduces spending by 15 percent of G.D.P. — the initial shock to demand could
be well over 30 percent of G.D.P.Obviously this simple rule does not work with such large numbers, but it illustrates that
Greece is likely to experience a very sharp recession — and there is substantial uncertainty around how bad the
economy will get. The program announced last weekend assumes Greek G.D.P. falls by 4 percent this year, then by
another 2.6 percent in 2011, before recovering to positive growth in 2012 and beyond.Such figures seem extremely
optimistic, particularly in the face of the civil unrest now sweeping Greece and the deep hostility expressed toward
Greece in some northern European policy circles.The pattern of growth is critical because, under this program, Greece
needs to grow out of its debt problem soon. Greece's debt-to-G.D.P. ratio will be a debilitating 145 percent at the end
of 2011.Now consider putting more realistic growth figures into the I.M.F. forecast for Greece's economy — e.g., with
G.D.P. declining 12 percent in 2011, then the debt-to-G.D.P. ratio may reach 155 percent. At these levels, with a 5
percent real interest rate and no growth, the country needs a primary surplus at 8 percent of G.D.P. to keep the debt-to-
G.D.P. ratio stable. It will be nowhere near that level. The I.M.F. program has Greece running a primary budget deficit
of around 1 percent of G.D.P. in that year, and that assumes a path for Greek growth that can be regarded only as an
""upside scenario.""The politics of these implied budget surpluses remains brutal. Since most Greek debt is held abroad,
roughly 80 percent of the budget savings the Greek government makes go straight to Germans, French and other foreign
debt holders (mostly banks). If growth turns out poorly, will the Greeks be prepared for ever-tougher austerity to pay
the Germans? Even if everything goes well, Greek citizens seem unlikely to welcome this version of their ""new normal.""
Last week the European leadership panicked — very late in the day — when it realized that the euro zone itself was at
risk of a meltdown. If the euro zone proves unwilling to protect a member like Greece from default, then bond investors
will run from Portugal and Spain also — if you doubt this, study carefully the interlocking debt picture published
recently in The New York Times. Higher yields on government debt would have caused concerns about potential bank
runs in these nations, and then spread to more nations in Europe.When there is such a ""run,"" it is not clear where it
stops. In the hazy distance, Belgium, France, Austria and many others were potentially at risk.
Even the Germans cannot afford to bail out those nations.Slapped in the face by this ugly scenario, the Europeans
decided to throw everything they and the I.M.F. had at bailing out Greece. The program as announced has only a small
chance of preventing eventual Greek bankruptcy, but it may still slow or avert a dangerous spiral downward — and
enormous collateral damage — in the rest of Europe.The I.M.F. floated in some fashion an alternative scenario with a
debt restructuring, but this was rejected by both the European Union and the Greek authorities. This is not a surprise;
leading European policy makers are completely unprepared for broader problems that would follow a Greek
""restructuring,"" because markets would immediately mark down the debt (i.e., increase the yields) for Portugal, Spain,
Ireland and even Italy.The fear and panic in the face of this would be unparalleled in modern times: When the Greeks
pay only 50 percent on the face value of their debt, what should investors expect from the Portuguese and Spanish? It
all becomes arbitrary, including which countries are dragged down.Someone has to decide who should be defended and
at what cost, and the European structures are completely unsuited to this kind of tough decision-making under
pressurein the extreme downside scenario, Germany is the only obvious safe haven within the euro zone, so its
government bond yields would collapse while other governments face sharply rising yields. The euro zone would likely
not hold together.There is still a narrow escape path, without immediate debt default and the chaos that that would
produce:-
Talk down the euro — moving toward parity with the American dollar would help lift growth across the euroz one.-
As the euro falls, bond yields will rise on the euro zone periphery. This will create episodes of panic. Enough short-term
financing must be in place to support the rollover of government debt..
Once the euro has fallen a great deal, announce the European Central Bank will support the euro at those levels (i.e.,
prevent appreciation, with G-20 tacit agreement), and also support the peripheral euro zone nations viewed as solvent
by buying their bonds whenever markets are chaotic.•
At that stage, but not before, the euro zone leadership needs to push weaker governments to restructure. That will
include Greece and perhaps also Portugal. Hopefully, in this scenario Spain can muddle through.•
European banks should be recapitalized as necessary and have most of their management replaced. This is a massive
failure of euro groupthink — including most notably at the political level — but there is no question that bank executives
have not behaved responsibly in a long while and should be replaced en masse.To the extent possible, some of the
ensuing losses should be shared with bank creditors. But be careful what you wish for. The bankers are powerful for a
reason; they have built vital yet fragile structures at the heart of our economies. Dismantle with care."
5383,"Another possible scenario: With Anji Hunter now, Tony's friend, talked to Peter yesterday, who had no clue, he will make
statement tomorrow, no guidance, but Anjils sense is but wholly conjectural that Gordon will be pushed aside, let Tories
form minoroty government, fight for David for leader and go into opposition, that is one Blairite view. Sid Sent via
Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
5384,"Peter on Sky News right now says LibDems will likely negotiate with both parties and then says !!!! He would be in favor
of Labour deal with LibDems. ""Don't be so horrified."" Peter robinson just lost his seat to the Alliance Party!11I
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
5385,"Will lock in for tonight.
We spoke to Marianne about coming in on the 8th."
5386,"Monica -
Huma Abedin <Huma@clintonemail.com>
Tuesday, June 29, 2010 6:01 AM
'hanleymr@state.gov'; H
Re:
is already is locked for tonite. I am seeing her right before actually."
5387,"When salon called, I told them to tell him about it so he might come."
5388,I figured.
5389,Yes easily.
5390,FYI
5391,I've asked AMS to have her team work up a nite note that we could send over tomorrow.
5392,"Robinson talking now, voice cracking but resolute in carving on, he STAYS as first minister despite defeat as MP Sent via
Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
5393,Brown now putting out he will try to form coalition if hung parliament Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry
5394,"Naomi Long (Alliance) defeated Peter Robinson for the East Belfast constituency. Huge upset. She was the mayor of
Belfast - you met her on the trip."
5396,"Can you send me the complete NYT piece so that we can get it into S's and Steinberg's book for tonight?
So you and Eric and anyone else you can gather should brainstorm away. Also, just give me a little
more on Simon Johnson so I can make the case for why she should read this."
5398,"Willy McCrea (OUP) holds seat; Reg's gamble fails. Looks unlikely UUP/Tory link-up will produce any seats.
Our team can't imagine he'll hold on as leader for long. One key commentator just said Reg is finished."
5399,"Hung parliament declared. Theme song of election: Rolling Stones' ""Satisfaction"": ""...can't get no..."" Everyone in turmoil.
Tories in complete turmoil. Gordon convening cabinet meeting this afternoon. I'm in touch. Will let you know... Sid"
5400,"Gordon has issued a statement this morning saying basically he's trying to negotiate a new government. Left a message
with David, will undoubtedly be in touch with him today, will let you know."
5401,"Clegg just announced he wants Tories to form government as a minority government. But this may not change anything.
Tories don't have a majority and can't move. May be an opening bid."
5402,"It seems to me that Clegg feels he's weak, can't form a grand progressive coalition--the Lib Dems have LOST seats--
Clegg's so-called ""modernizing"" has failed. So Clegg is saying no deal with Labour, Tories must govern without acting on
their program. He's plalying for another election relatively soon, perhaps a year, hoping to do better, but will do even
worse having played the spoiler. And if Labour goes out, so does Gordon and Labour will have a new face, probably
David. Sid
="
5403,"Shaun is going to Downing St to meet with Gordon, Peter, and two others (Stuart Woods, Sue Nye, Gordon's aides) to
discuss what to do, will learn outcome as soon as meeting is over. Sid"
5404,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, May 7, 2010 8:03 AM
H
Fw: Edward Campbell"
5405,"See below, in particular section B. That is the nub of Harold's argument."
5406,"Wanted to make sure you saw this item:
Traces of gunpowder found in the wreckage of a sunken Republic of Korea naval ship have been identified as those
generated by the explosion of a torpedo, an anonymous ROK government official said. (yonhapnews.co.kr)
Also, we're still in a bit of a holding pattern on prox talks, though looking very good."
5407,"7:30 am CONFERENCE/PRE-BRIEF CALL Private Residence
8:15 am DEPART Private Residence *En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:20 am TAPED TV INTERVIEW w/SCOTT PELLY, CBS'S ""60 MINUTES""
10:00 am 7th and 8thFloors * (One Video taping in Monroe Room, 8th Floor)
10:15 am KEYNOTE ADDRESS AND PLAQUE DEDICATION AT FOREIGN
11:00 am AFFAIRS DAY Dean Acheson Auditorium and C Street Lobby
11:15 am CONF. CALL w/FRENCH FM KOUCHNER, GERMAN FM
11:30 am VVESTERWELLE, UK POLITICAL DIRECTOR GEOFFREY ADAMS AND EU
HIGH REPRESENTATIVE ASHTON Secretary's Office
11:30 am MEETING w/HAROLD KOH, TODD BUCHWALD AND CHERYL
12:00 pm MILLS Secretary's Office
12:15 pm WEEKLY DEVELOPMENT MEETING
1:00 pm Secretary's Office
1:00 pm SWEARING-IN CEREMONY FOR RETA JO LEWIS, SPECIAL
1:20 pm REPRESENTATIVE FOR GLOBAL INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
Treaty Room, Th Floor
1:30pm PHONE CALL w/INDONESIAN FM MARTY NATALEGAWA
1:45pm Secretary's Office
1:45 pm OFFICE TIME
2:20 pm Secretary's Office
2:20 pm DEPART State Department *En route Washington National Airport
2:40 pm ARRIVE Washington National Airport
3:00 pm DEPART Washington National Airport via US Airways Shuttle #2176
En route New York, NY .
4:25 pm ARRIVE New York, New York-LaGuardia Airport
4:35 pm DEPART New York-LaGuardia Airport *En route Private Residence
5:25 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5408,"I have talked to him, as has Derek, but I need one more convo before you see him."
5409,Fyi
5410,"Madam Secretary,
Following up on your trip to Ecuador, Jake asked me to send you a quick update on the Financial Action Task Force's
(FATF) listing of Ecuador:
(SBU) On June 25 the FATF moved Ecuador down a notch from a list of countries with serious strategic deficiencies in
measures against money laundering and financing terrorism. Ecuador is now on the ""Improving AML/CFT Compliance:
On-going Process"" list for showing progress in its efforts against money laundering and financing terrorism.
(SBU) According to Treasury, the change in Ecuador's status stems from its commitment to an action plan with the FATF,
and the GOE's demonstrated high-level political commitment to work toward AML/CFT (anti-money laundering —
combating the financing of terrorism) compliance.
WHA is looking into options for next steps.
Please let me know if you would like any further information.
Best,
Mike
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
(cell)"
5411,"Madame Secretary -
Forgive the email but I just wanted to thank you and President Clinton for so graciously opening your home and inviting
me to join in celebrating It was a truly wonderful evening. B6
Safe travels!
,
-Rob"
5413,"Top 2 Civilians Face Rockiness in Afghan Shift By MARK LANDLER The New York Times Thu, July 1, 2010
WASHINGTON — As General David H. Petraeus takes command in Afghanistan, the two top American civilian officials in
the war face an uncertain and tricky future, working with a newly empowered military leader, under the gaze of an
impatient president who has put them on notice that his fractious war council needs to pull together.
Richard C. Holbrooke, the Obama administration's special representative to the region, and Karl W. Eikenberry, the
ambassador to Afghanistan, both hung on to their jobs in the uproar that followed Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal's career-
ending quotes in Rolling Stone magazine.
But privately, at least one senior White House official suggested using General McChrystal's exit as an excuse for a
housecleaning, according to senior officials. That was rejected as too disruptive during a military campaign that relies
heavily on civilian support, these people said.
In recent days, other administration officials have begun floating the idea that Ambassador Eikenberry might be
replaced by
Ryan C. Crocker, the highly regarded former ambassador in Iraq who forged a close partnership with General Petraeus
during the successful Iraq troop increase.
Such a prospect is viewed as remote, given Mr. Crocker's prestigious new post at
Texas A&M University. But the fact that his name is being invoked underlines the challenges that confront Ambassador
Eikenberry, as he adapts to a new partner — one who has strong ideas about how soldiers and diplomats should work
together in war.
It also illustrates the remarkably powerful role that General Petraeus will assume in the nine-year-old war, setting him
up as almost a viceroy in Afghanistan and a key broker in negotiations between President
Hamid Karzai and Pakistan over an eventual political settlement.
Prior to General Petraeus's arrival, some critics said the White House had created a problem by recruiting several
forceful, ambitious personalities and giving them jobs with overlapping responsibilities. Administration officials
acknowledge that, as one said, ""There are obviously a number of substantial personalities on the team."" But the White
House believes that the current lineup can mesh, and that a difficult war demands this much talent.
Still, the McChrystal blow-up has reverberated through the State Department. Secretary of State
Hillary Rodham Clinton instructed Ambassador Eikenberry and Mr. Holbrooke to take a hard look at the civilian team,
two officials said. She is not wedded to the current lineup if it continues to bog down in internecine battles, they said.
""You can't have a major shift in a civ-mil structure without having the civilian side take a step back and look at
everything,"" said a senior State Department official, using the jargon for a civilian-military campaign.
Be
General Petraeus, whose appointment was approved 99-0 by the Senate on Wednesday, took pains at his confirmation
hearing on Tuesday to back a unified civilian and military effort. He noted then that he had telephoned Mr. Holbrooke
and would rendezvous with Ambassador Eikenberry in Brussels, so the two could land in Kabul together.
""Holbrooke has been my wingman, to a great degree,"" General Petraeus said in an interview. ""We have had, and do
have, a very good relationship."" That role, he said, will now fall to Ambassador Eikenberry.
Ambassador Eikenberry was highly critical of the Pentagon's proposal last year to send 60,000 additional troops to
Afghanistan, which led to a difficult relationship with General McChrystal. But in fact General Petraeus was the true
architect of the plan.
The ambassador, a retired lieutenant general and former commander in Afghanistan, graduated from
West Point in 1973, a year ahead of General Petraeus, but they did not know each other at the academy. The two share
a scholarly bent: General Petraeus holds a Ph.D. from Princeton, while Ambassador Eikenberry has Master's degrees
from
Harvard and Stanford.
While they were never assigned together, their careers intersected twice. In Iraq, General Eikenberry led an assessment
of Iraqi security forces while General Petraeus was commanding the 101st Airborne Division in Mosul. When General
Eikenberry was commander in Afghanistan, General Petraeus led an assessment of Afghan National Security Forces.
General Petraeus declined to discuss personnel issues, while Ambassador Eikenberry and Mr. Holbrooke turned down
requests for an interview. Mr. Crocker, now the dean of the George Bush School of Government at Texas A&M, did not
return a call for comment.
For Mr. Holbrooke, the new landscape is challenging in other ways. Officials said his job security was less in doubt than it
was six months ago, when his ouster was the subject of endless Washington chatter. Yet he has arguably become a less
central player:
Jacob J. Lew, a deputy secretary of state, manages much of the civilian influx in Afghanistan that Mr. Holbrooke helped
shape, while the embassy in Kabul is carrying it out. Mr. Holbrooke's current portfolio has played to his weaknesses, his
own allies admit. He is best as a high-level negotiator, and not as comfortable with the nitty-gritty work of helping
Afghanistan build an economy.
These days, Mr. Holbrooke has become a globe-trotting diplomat, trying to retain flagging European allies while seeking
to draw influential Muslim countries like Egypt into helping Afghanistan. At a recent conference of 35 countries in
Madrid, Mr. Holbrooke drummed up more support from allies for the Afghan government's campaign to reintegrate
Taliban fighters into mainstream society.
Mr. Karzai's longer-term effort to reconcile with Taliban leaders, and his negotiations with Pakistan, could propel Mr.
Holbrooke back into a central role. Were these talks to become more serious, several officials said, Mr. Holbrooke's
negotiating skills could be put to use, as a broker and guardian of American interests. For now, though, as evidence of
General Petraeus's influence, he will do most of the shuttling between Kabul and Islamabad.
On his last visit to the region, Mr. Holbrooke met with Mr. Karzai and with senior Pakistani officials, including the army
chief of staff,
Ashfaq Parvez Kayani. Mr. Holbrooke's past run-ins with Mr. Karzai, several officials said, have not hindered his ability to
deal with the Afghan leader, and Pakistani officials said they trusted him.
Husain Haqqani, Pakistan's ambassador to Washington, said that Mr. Holbrooke took time to understand Pakistan's
concerns. ""Ambassador Holbrooke is liked by some, admired by others and seen as effective, even by those who may
not like him,"" Mr. Haqqani said.
Still, General Petraeus is indisputably the key player, and he has wasted no time asserting his control. On a secure
videoconference call last Saturday, a person familiar with the call said, General Petraeus threw his support behind a
costly, and controversial, plan to install temporary generators to supply more electricity to Kandahar, the Taliban
stronghold that is the next major American military target.
Mr. Holbrooke and Ambassador Eikenberry swiftly assented."
5414,"Maariv: Netanyahu won't meet Clinton; 'sources' say she
""isn't relevant""
Didi Remez I July 1,2010 at 15:25 I Categories: Diplomacy I URL: http://wp.me/pH1QV-Ep
Do they honestly think that publicizing a quote like this, on record or off, works to their advantage?
Israeli diplomatic [euphemism for Prime Minister's Office -- DR] sources said: ""Clinton isn't relevant and
is out of the circle of influence. Mitchell has taken over the peace process to a great extent and Obama, in
any event, is the important person in this story because he is the one who decides.""
etanyahu to meet Obama, but not Clinton
Eli Bardenstein, Maariv, July 1 2010 [page 7; Hebrew original here and at bottom of post]
rime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu is to leave next week for Washington, where he will meet
with US President Barack Obama. Rather curiously, he is not scheduled to meet with Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton in the course of his visit to Washington.
Contrary to his previous visit in March, this time the US administration intends to create the impression,
outwardly at least, that the severe crisis in the relationship has passed and that the relations between the
two countries are as strong as ever. In order to bolster that impression, the two leaders will meet the media
together and will be photographed. As opposed to the previous time, Netanyahu will also be put up at Blair
House, the official White House guesthouse, and not at a hotel.
That said, officials in Washington are waiting apprehensively for the answers that Netanyahu will provide in
the course of the meeting, which is expected to address the transition from the proximity talks that are at an
impasse to direct negotiations. Obama, apparently, will demand that Netanyahu agree to extend the
construction freeze in Judea and Samaria beyond the September 26 expiration date in hope of securing PA
Chairman Abu Mazen's consent to begin direct talks with Israel. For the time being, the forum of seven is
divided over this issue.
Read more of this post"
5415,Pls keep the updates coming!
5416,"Going now to jonathan's office, will hear from shaun as soon as downing St meeting breaks up. On way from guardian.
Think clegg misplaying, doesn't get his moment or power, will explain more later..."
5417,"May 7, 2010
For: Hillary"
5420,"Cameron has openly reached out to Clegg for a deal, promising a party committee of inquiry on proportional
representation. They seem to be coordinating, but hard to see how far right now. More to come..."
5421,"May 7, 2010
For: Hillary"
5422,MS -- A wonderful note!
5423,"I just wanted to make sure you know that the CARE speech is now going to focus on nutrition/health/early childhood,
rather than being a major health speech. I still feel that you need to do a health speech as a bookend to food and water
— perhaps before UNGA. You could focus on health in the context of the larger Millennium Dev Goals. You have not
given a speech yet about maternal and child health. We have a great story to tell with our investment in GHI, and there
will be an opportunity to tell it with the ramp-up to UNGA (with the Summit focusing on MDGs). There is a tremendous
amount of activity going on elsewhere in the world. And this is a legacy issue for you. (I have already relayed this idea to
CDM and Jake)."
5424,"From'
Sent: Friday, May 07, 2010 3:51 PM
To: \
Subject: Campbell - Visitation and Funeral Arrangements
Sunday, May 9 — Visitation @ 3pm — 5pm
Dunn's Funeral Home
2121 Grand Avenue
Des Moines, IA
Monday, May 10 — Funeral @ 12:00n
St. Anthony's Catholic Church (Southside)
15 Indianola Avenue
Des Moines, IA"
5425,"See the highlighted specifically.
cdm"
5426,"MS -- Ijust spoke to Maggie and she can meet with you/do dinner on Tuesday night around 7pm. That works well on
your schedule but of course wanted to double check before locking in with her.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
B6"
5427,"Valmoro, Lona J <ValmoroU@state.gov>
Friday, May 7, 2010 5:31 PM
Re: Maggie
The VP/Karzai dinner is on Wednesday night but will check to see what he has on Tuesday too.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
B6"
5429,"On Tuesday night, after our reception, he has nothing planned, ""rest"" time at the hotel. The VP dinner is Wednesday
night.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State B6"
5430,Doesn't give u chance to change your mind if u decide to go to dinner.
5431,"Valmoro, Lona J <ValmoroU@state.gov>
Friday, May 7, 2010 5:49 PM
Abedin, Huma
Re: Maggie
Sounds good.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State B6"
5432,"http://maxblumenthal.com/2010/07/the-summer-camp-of-destruction-israeli-high-schoolers-join-in-the-destructionrof-a-
bedouin-town/
1
The ""Summer Camp Of Destruction:"" Israeli High Schoolers
Assist The Razing Of A Bedouin Town
On 07.31.10, By Max Blumenthal
AL-ARAKIB, ISRAEL — On July 26, Israeli police demolished 45 buildings in the unrecognized Bedouin village of al-
Arakib, razing the entire village to the ground to make way for a Jewish National Fund forest. The destruction was part of
a larger project to force the Bedouin community of the Negev away from their ancestral lands and into seven Indian
reservation-style communities the Israeli government has constructed for them. The land will then be open for Jewish
settlers, including young couples in the army and those who may someday be evacuated from the West Bank after a
peace treaty is signed. For now, the Israeli government intends to uproot as many villages as possible and erase them
from the map by establishing ""facts on the ground"" in the form of JNF forests. (See video of of al-Arakib's
demolition here).
Moments before the destruction of the Bedouin village of al-Arakib, Israeli high school age police volunteers lounge on
furniture taken from a family's home. [The following four photos are by Ata Abu Madyam of Arab Negev News.
One of the most troubling aspects of the destruction of al-Arakib was a report by CNN that the hundreds of Israeli riot
police who stormed the village were accompanied by ""busloads of cheering civilians."" Who were these civilians and why
didn't CNN or any outlet investigate further?
I traveled to al-Arakib yesterday with a delegation from Ta'ayush, an Israeli group that promotes a joint Arab-Jewish
struggle against the occupation. The activists spent the day preparing games and activities for the village's traumatized
children, helping the villagers replace their uprooted olive groves, and assisting in the reconstruction of their demolished
homes. In a massive makeshift tent where many of al-Arakib's residents now sleep, I interviewed village leaders about the
identity of the cheering civilians. Each one confirmed the presence of the civilians, describing how they celebrated the
demolitions. As I compiled details, the story grew increasingly horrific. After interviewing more than a half dozen 'elders of
the village, I was able to finally identify the civilians in question. What I discovered was more disturbing than I had
ima. med.
Israeli police youth volunteers pick through the belongings an al-Arakib family
Arab Negev News publisher Ata Abu Madyam supplied me with a series of photos he took of the civilians in action. They
depicted Israeli high school students who appeared to have volunteered as members of the Israeli police civilian guard (I
'am working on identifying some participants by name). Prior to the demolitions, the student volunteers were sent into the
villagers' homes to extract their furniture and belongings. A number of villagers including Madyam told me the volunteers
smashed windows and mirrors in their homes and defaced family photographs with crude drawings. Then they lounged
around on the furniture of al-Arakib residents in plain site of the owners. Finally, according to Matyam, the volunteers
celebrated while bulldozers destroyed the homes.
""What we learned from the summer camp of destruction,"" Madyam remarked, ""is that Israeli youth are not being educated
on democracy, they are being raised on racism."" (The cover of the latest issue of Madyam's Arab Negev News features a
photo of Palestinians being expelled to Jordan in 1948 juxtaposed with a photo of a family fleeing al-Arakib last week. The
headline reads, ""Nakba 2010."")
0
According to residents of al-Arakib, the youth volunteers vandalized homes throughout the village
The Israeli civilian guard, which incorporates 70,000 citizens including youth as young as 15 (about 15% of Israeli police
volunteers are teenagers), is one of many programs designed to incorporate Israeli children into the state's military
apparatus. It is not hard to imagine what lessons the high school students who participated in the leveling of al-Arakib took
from their experience, nor is it especially difficult to predict what sort of citizens they will become once they reach'
adulthood. Not only are they being indoctrinated to swear blind allegiance to the military, they are learning to treat the
Arab outclass as less than human. The volunteers' behavior toward Bedouins, who are citizens of Israel and serve loyally
in Israeli army combat units despite widespread racism, was strikingly reminiscent of the behavior of settler youth in
Hebron who pelt Palestinian shopkeepers in the old city with eggs, rocks and human waste. If there is a distinction
between the two cases, it is that the Hebron settlers act as vigilantes while the teenagers of Israeli civilian guard vandalize
Arab property as agents of the state.
The spectacle of Israeli youth helping destroy al-Arakib helps explain why 56% of Jewish Israeli high school students do
not believe Arabs should be allowed to serve in the Knesset — why the next generation wants apartheid. Indeed, the
widespread indoctrination of Israeli youth by the military apparatus is a central factor in Israel's authoritarian trend. It
would be difficult for any adolescent boy to escape from an experience like al-Arakib, where adults in heroic warror garb
encoura e him to articipate in and gloat over acts of massive destruction, with even a trace of democratic values.
Youth volunteers extract belongings from village homes as bulldozers move in
As for the present condition of Israeli democracy, it is essential to consider the way in which the state pits its own citizens
against one another, enlisting the Jewish majority as conquerers while targeting the Arab others as, in the wordsI of Zionist
founding father Chaim Weizmann, ""obstacles that had to be cleared on a difficult path."" Historically, only failing states
have encouraged such corrosive dynamics to take hold. That is why the scenes from al-Arakib, from the demolished
homes to the uprooted gardens to the grinning teens who joined the mayhem, can be viewed as much more than the
destruction of a village. They are snapshots of the phenomenon that is laying Israeli society as a whole to waste
0
...and the destruction begins"
5433,"sbwhoeop
Monday, August 2, 2010 12:37 PM
fyi
Go Back
Print this page
Skip to content
Subscribe to The New Yorker
C3
The Political Scene
The Empty Chamber
Just how broken is the Senate?
Seventy-six nominees for judgeships and executive posts have been approved by committees but, because of blocks,
haven't come up for a vote in the full Senate, leaving courtrooms idle and jobs unfilled across the upper levels of the
Obama Administration....
The tally of cloture votes reflects only a small fraction of senatorial obstruction. Three hundred and forty-five bills passed
by the House have been prevented from even coming up for debate in the Senate....
by George Packer August 9, 2010
Text Size:
Small Text
Medium Text
Large Text
Print E-Mail Feeds
Cit and watch us for seven days,"" one senator says of the deadlocked chamber. ""You know what you'll see happening?
Nothing.""
'This is just one of those days when you want to throw up your hands and say, 'What in the world are we doing?'""
Senator Claire McCaskill, the Missouri Democrat, said.
""It's unconscionable,"" Carl Levin, the senior Democratic senator from Michigan, said. ""The obstructionism has become
mindless.""
The Senators were in the Capitol, sunk into armchairs before the marble fireplace in the press lounge, which is directly
behind the Senate chamber. It was four-thirty on a Wednesday afternoon. McCaskill, in a matching maroon jacket and
top, looked exasperated; Levin glowered over his spectacles.
""Also, it's a dumb rule in itself,"" McCaskill said. ""It's time we started looking at some of these rules.""
She was referring to Senate Rule XXVI, Paragraph 5, which requires unanimous consent for committees and
subcommittees to hold hearings after two in the afternoon while the Senate is in session. Both Levin and McCaskill had
scheduled hearings that day for two-thirty. Typically, it wouldn't be difficult to get colleagues to waive the rule; a general
and an admiral had flown halfway around the world to appear before Levin's Armed Services Committee, and McCaskill's
Subcommittee on Contracting Oversight of the Homeland Security Committee was investigating the training of Afghan
police. But this was March 24th, the day after President Barack Obama signed the health-care-reform bill, in a victory
ceremony at the White House; it was also the day that the Senate was to vote on a reconciliation bill for health-care
reform, approved by the House three nights earlier, which would retroactively remove the new law's most embarrassing
sweetheart deals and complete the yearlong process of passing universal health care. Republicans, who had fought the
bill as a bloc, were in no mood to make things easy.
So, four hours earlier, when Levin went to the Senate floor and asked for consent to hold his hearing, Senator Richard
Burr, Republican of North Carolina, and a member of Levin's committee, had refused. ""I have no personal objection to
continuing,"" Burr said. But, he added, ""there is objection on our side of the aisle. Therefore, I would have to object.""
Burr had to object on behalf of his party because he was the only Republican in the chamber when Levin spoke. In
general, when senators give speeches on the floor, their colleagues aren't around, and the two or three who might be
present aren't listening. They're joking with aides, or e-mailing Twitter ideas to their press secretaries, or getting their first
look at a speech they're about to give before the eight unmanned cameras that provide a live feed to C-SPAN2. The
presiding officer of the Senate—freshmen of the majority party take rotating, hour-long shifts intended to introduce them to
the ways of the institution—sits in his chair on the dais, scanning his BlackBerry or reading a Times article about the
Senate. Michael Bennet, a freshman Democrat from Colorado, said, ""Sit and watch us for seven days—just watch the
floor. You know what you'll see happening? Nothing. When I'm in the chair, I sit there thinking, I wonder what they're
doing in China right now?""
Between speeches, there are quorum calls, time killers in which a Senate clerk calls the roll at the rate of one name every
few minutes. The press gallery, above the dais, is typically deserted, as journalists prefer to hunker down in the press
lounge, surfing the Web for analysis of current Senate negotiations; television screens alert them if something of interest
actually happens in the chamber. The only people who pay attention to a speech are the Senate stenographers. On this
afternoon, two portly bald men in suits stood facing the speaker from a few feet away, tapping at the transcription
machines, which resembled nineteenth-century cash registers, slung around their necks. The Senate chamber is an
intimate room where men and women go to talk to themselves for the record.
Like many other aspects of senatorial procedure, Rule XXVI, Paragraph 5 is a relic from the days when senators had to
hover around their desks to know what was happening on the floor during the main afternoon debate. (The desks, some
built as long ago as 1819, are mahogany, and their lids lift up, like those in an old schoolhouse; the desks of the Majority
and Minority Leader are still equipped with brass spittoons.) In the press lounge, McCaskill said, with light sarcasm,
""Somebody told me the rule is to make sure people pay attention to what's happening on the floor during debate and not
be distracted by committee work. Clearly, it's an old rule.""
The Republicans had turned this old rule into a new means of obstruction. There would be no hearings that afternoon; the
general and the admiral would have to come back another day. Like investment bankers on Wall Street, senators these
days direct much of their creative energy toward the manipulation of arcane rules and loopholes, scoring short-term
successes while magnifying their institution's broader dysfunction.
Around five o'clock, the chamber began to fill, as the reconciliation bill came up for a vote; there were twenty-three
amendments pending, all from Republicans, and perhaps many more to come. Ordinarily, debate and voting on an
amendment might take two legislative days, but under the rules of the reconciliation bill the senators were to dispatch the
amendments one after another, as in a hot-dog-eating contest, with a minute of debate for each side. The goal was to
finish the bill by the end of the evening, so that senators wouldn't miss a day of their spring recess—apparently, the only
thing worse than a government takeover of the health-care system. The usual longueurs of the Senate, where forty
minutes can tick away on the antique clock above the rear double doors without a word's being spoken, were about to
yield to a frenzy. Harry Reid, the Majority Leader, from Nevada, had predicted that the process, known as Vote-O-Rama,
would go past two in the morning, and had warned senators to stay close to the chamber.
Max Baucus, of Montana, the manager of the bill for the Democrats, rose and said, ""This is the first time in recent memory
that a reconciliation bill has all the amendments on one side only. These are clearly amendments designed to kill the
reconciliation and, therefore, kill health-care reform. So I very much hope that all of these amendments are defeated.""
Tall, gaunt Judd Gregg, of New Hampshire, the bill's Republican manager, took the floor. ""The position on the other side
of the aisle is: no amendments allowed, even if they are good,"" he said. Indignation rouged his cheeks, and his voice rose
half an octave. ""Obviously, they presume the Republican Party is an inconvenience. The democratic process is an
inconvenience. It also appears, considering the opposition to this out in America, that the American people are an
inconvenience.""
The Senate chamber is laid out in four concentric semicircles, with adjacent desks almost touching on the crowded
Democratic side, and the desks of the much smaller Republican minority spaced loosely apart. The design is meant to
emphasize the senators' unity. But Baucus and Gregg avoided eye contact across the six feet of aisle that now divides the
chamber into two constantly warring factions. Senators are required, by custom, to speak of one another in the third
person, directing their anger and sarcasm through whichever poor freshman happens to be the presiding officer at the
moment. Rule XIX, Paragraphs 2 and 3—one of the original rules drawn from Thomas Jefferson's ""Manual of
Parliamentary Practice""—bars senators from imputing unworthy conduct or motives to another senator, and from insulting
any senator's state. But there is no rule against finger-wagging, and Baucus wagged his at Gregg while shouting at Al
Franken, of Minnesota, who had started a shift in the presiding officer's chair: ""Mr. President, make no mistake, the intent
of every single one of the amendments offered on the other side of the aisle is to kill health-care reform. . . . A senator on
the other side of the aisle stood up and said that this is hopefully the President's Waterloo. They want to kill health-care
reform!""
The voice of Stuart Smalley filled the chamber: ""The time of the senator has expired.""
For the next nine hours, the chamber became the stage of a theatrical whose ending, like almost everything that happens
on the Senate floor, was known in advance to all. The Republican goal in Vote-O-Rama was to embarrass the Democrats
while appearing to suggest useful changes; the Democratic goal was to prevent any change to the bill, so that it wouldn't
have to return to the House, where it might be voted down. Several of the Republican amendments had been designed to
make Democrats look hypocritical, by forcing them to vote against policies that the Party typically supports. One
amendment, for example, declared that the health-care bill could not be linked to a tax hike on individuals making less
than two hundred thousand dollars a year. Other amendments were more nakedly partisan, and outlandish. David Vitter, a
Louisiana Republican, proposed an amendment that repealed the entire law. Senator Tom Coburn, a Republican
obstetrician from Oklahoma, introduced an amendment to insure that veterans diagnosed with mental illness would not be
denied the right to own firearms, and another to prevent ""convicted child molesters, rapists, and sex offenders"" from
buying erectile-dysfunction drugs with taxpayer funds. Coburn got through the minute he was allotted to explain his Viagra
amendment without cracking a smile. ""This is not a game amendment,"" he insisted. ""It actually saves money.""
So many senators snickered that the presiding officer banged his gavel for order.
""The amendment offered by the senator from Oklahoma makes a mockery of this Senate,"" Baucus declared. ""It is a crass
political stunt aimed at making thirty-second commercials, not public policy."" Baucus asked for the yeas and nays, and a
clerk called the roll at a ragged pace. ""Mr. Coburn, Mr. Cochran, Ms. Collins."" Thirty-five-second pause. ""Mr. Conrad, Mr.
Corker."" Ten seconds. ""Mr. Cornyn."" Senators pay no attention to the sound of their name; they cast votes when they're
so inclined—wandering in late, shuffling down the chamber's gentle blue-carpeted steps to the swarm of colleagues
milling about in the well, where the clerks sit at a table, and then holding a finger up or down. At one point, John McCain—
now just one of a hundred senators and struggling to stay in office—spent half a minute waving stiff-armed, trying to catch
the eye of a clerk so he could cast his vote. In the end, two Democrats—Evan Bayh, of Indiana, and Ben Nelson, of
Nebraska—joined the Republicans in opposing Viagra for sex offenders. The amendment was defeated.
The carpeting in the chamber absorbs voices, and during the long night one of the few that rose above the muffled drone
was that of Charles Schumer, who said to Gregg, ""Get to work! Stop screwing around with health care!"" Sporadically, a
sharp cackle emanated from Al Franken, who wandered the chamber, looking for Republicans he could charm into
laughing. Observed from the press gallery, the senators in their confined space began to resemble zoo animals—Levin a
shambling brown bear, John Thune a loping gazelle, Jim Bunning a maddened grizzly. Each one displayed a limited set of
behaviors: in conversations, John Kerry planted himself a few inches away, loomed, and clamped his hands down on a
colleague's shoulders. Joe Lieberman patted everyone on the back. It became clear which senators were loners (Russ
Feingold, Daniel Akaka) and which were social (Blanche Lincoln, Lindsey Graham); which senators were important (Dick
Durbin, Jon Kyl) and which were ignored (Bayh, Bunning).
Past midnight, Durbin slumped at his desk, one hand over his face, yawning painfully. Susan Collins was going through
her mail. Twenty-three amendments had been voted down, and the Republicans were proposing a fresh batch. ""Can we
get some order?"" Bunning growled, before he introduced a proposal to let senior citizens opt out of parts of Medicare. It
was the only amendment that any Republicans joined the Democrats to defeat.
Harry Reid controls the Senate's schedule, but Mitch McConnell, of Kentucky, who is the Minority Leader, can object.
Since nearly everything in the Senate depends on unanimous consent, the main business of the place is a continuous
negotiation between these two supremely unsentimental men. That night, they played a game of chicken: McConnell,
unsmiling, his eyes riveted ahead, held out the prospect of dozens more amendments; Reid, a former boxer, was
hunched and mumbling, playing rope-a-dope, vowing to fend off amendments all night. The two leaders left the chamber
to confer privately about how to proceed. Inside, the atmosphere of a slumber party set in. Debbie Stabenow, of Michigan,
her hand across her heart, sang a sentimental duet with Robert Menendez, of New Jersey. Exhaustion momentarily
eased the partisan divide. Claire McCaskill sat down beside Tom Coburn, held up an erect finger in his face, as if casting
her Viagra vote, then let it go limp. Coburn could be heard to joke, ""The longest it lasted was thirty seconds.""
At two-forty-five in the morning, Reid suddenly declared the Senate adjourned. The Senate parliamentarian had just found
two small violations of the reconciliation rules, meaning that in the morning, despite the Democrats' efforts, the bill would
go back to the House for another vote. At the bang of the gavel, the senators fled. In the parking lot, on the Capitol's
northeast side, McCaskill climbed into her S.U.V. Levin, in a cramped sedan, was chauffeured off into the empty streets.
On a marble ledge near the exit, Arlen Specter sat alone, a ghost in a brown suit, staring straight ahead, as if waiting for
someone to take him away.
The Senate reconvened at 9:45 A.M. Around two in the afternoon, the members gathered for the final vote, and the
Democrats were giddy. Tom Harkin, of Iowa, and Christopher Dodd, of Connecticut, even exchanged a hug. ""Everyone's
tired,"" Reid declared before the final vote. ""This legislative fight is one for the record books."" He was so fatigued that he
initially voted the wrong way. Lindsey Graham came in late, delaying the tally by ten minutes. ""Way to go, Lindsey, way to
stretch it out,"" Sam Brownback told him. A few Republicans lingered and took in the moment, like players on the losing
team at the end of the World Series. After a year of work, health-care reform had passed, 56-43, and for a moment the
chamber's Tweeting pygmies had become legislative giants.
The Senate is often referred to as ""the world's greatest deliberative body."" Jeff Merkley, a freshman Democrat from
Oregon, said, ""That is a phrase that I wince each time I hear it, because the amount of real deliberation, in terms of
exchange of ideas, is so limited."" Merkley could remember witnessing only one moment of floor debate between a
Republican and a Democrat. ""The memory I took with me was: 'Wow, that's unusual—there's a conversation occurring in
which they're making point and counterpoint and challenging each other.' And yet nobody else was in the chamber.""
Tom Udall, a freshman Democrat from New Mexico, could not recall seeing a senator change another senator's mind.
""You would really need a good hour or two of extensive exchange among folks that really know the issue,"" he said.
Instead, a senator typically gives ""a prepared speech that's already been vetted through the staff. Then another guy gets
up and gives a speech on a completely different subject."" From time to time, senators of the same party carry on a
colloquy—""I would be interested in the distinguished senator from Iowa's view of the other side's Medicare Advantage
plan""—that has been scripted in advance by aides.
While senators are in Washington, their days are scheduled in fifteen-minute intervals: staff meetings, interviews, visits
from lobbyists and home-state groups, caucus lunches, committee hearings, briefing books, floor votes, fund-raisers.
Each senator sits on three or four committees and even more subcommittees, most of which meet during the same
morning hours, which helps explain why committee tables are often nearly empty, and why senators drifting into a hearing
can barely sustain a coherent line of questioning. All this activity is crammed into a three-day week, for it's an unwritten
rule of the modern Senate that votes are almost never scheduled for Mondays or Fridays, which allows senators to spend
four days away from the capital. Senators now, unlike those of several decades ago, often keep their families in their
home states, where they return most weekends, even if it's to Alaska or Idaho—a concession to endless fund-raising, and
to the populist anti-Washington mood of recent years. (When Newt Gingrich became Speaker of the House, in 1995, he
told new Republican members not to move their families to the capital.) Tom Daschle, the former Democratic leader, said,
""When we scheduled votes, the only day where we could be absolutely certain we had all one hundred senators there
was Wednesday afternoon.""
Nothing dominates the life of a senator more than raising money. Tom Harkin, the Iowa Democrat, said, ""Of any free time
you have, I would say fifty per cent, maybe even more,"" is spent on fund-raising. In addition to financing their own
campaigns, senators participate at least once a week in the Power Hour, during which they make obligatory calls on
behalf of the Party (in the Democrats' case, from a three-story town house across Constitution Avenue from the Senate
office buildings, since they're barred from using their own offices to raise money). Lamar Alexander, the Tennessee
Republican, insisted that the donations are never sufficient to actually buy a vote, but he added, ""It sucks up time that a
senator ought to be spending getting to know other senators, working on issues.""
In June, 2009, top aides to Max Baucus, whose Finance Committee was negotiating the health-care-reform bill, took time
to meet with two health-care lobbyists, who themselves were former Baucus aides. (Baucus received more than a million
dollars from the industry for his 2008 reelection campaign.) That month, according to Common Cause, industry groups
were spending $1.4 million a day to lobby members of Congress. Udall, speaking of the corrosive effect of fund-raising
and lobbying, said, ""People know it in their heart—they know this place is dominated by special interests. The over-all bills
are not nearly as bold because of the influence of money.""
Deschle sketched a portrait of the contemporary senator who is too busy to think: ""Sometimes, you're dialling for dollars,
you get the call, you've got to get over to vote, you've got fifteen minutes. You don't have a clue what's on the floor, your
staff is whispering in your ears, you're running onto the floor, then you check with your leader—you double check—but,
just to make triple sure, there's a little sheet of paper on the clerk's table: The leader recommends an aye vote, or a no
vote. So you've got all these checks just to make sure you don't screw up, but even then you screw up sometimes. But, if
you're ever pressed, 'Why did you vote that way?'—you just walk out thinking, Oh, my God, I hope nobody asks, because
I don't have a clue.""
Aides, at the elbows of senators as they shuttle between their offices and the Capitol, have proliferated over the past few
decades, and they play a crucial role. Lamar Alexander, who has an office of fifty people, pointed out that staff members,
who are younger and often more ideological than their bosses, and less dependent on institutional relationships, tend to
push senators toward extremes. Often, aides are the main actors behind proposed legislation—writing bills, negotiating
the details—while the senator is relegated to repeating talking points on Fox' or MSNBC.
One day in his office, Udall picked up some tabloids from his coffee table and waved them at me. ""You know about all
these rags that cover the Hill, right?"" he said, smiling. There are five dailies—Politico, The Hill, Roll Call, Con gressDaily,
and CQ Today—all of which emphasize insider conflict. The senators, who like to complain about the trivializing effect of
the ""24/7 media,"" provide no end of fodder for it. The news of the day was what Udall called a ""dust-up"" between Scott
Brown, the freshman Massachusetts Republican, and a staffer for Jim DeMint, the arch-conservative from South Carolina;
the staffer had Tweeted that Brown was voting too often with the Democrats, leading Brown to confront DeMint on the
Senate floor over this supposed breach of protocol. Bloggers carry so much influence that many senators have a young
press aide dedicated to the care and feeding of online media. News about, by, and for a tiny kingdom of political
obsessives dominates the attention of senators and staff, while stories that might affect their constituents go unreported
because their home-state papers can no longer afford to have bureaus in Washington. Dodd, who came to the Senate in
1981 and will leave next January, told me, ""I used to have eleven Connecticut newspaper reporters who covered me on a
daily basis. I don't have one today, and haven't had one in a number of years. Instead, D.C. publications only see me
through the prism of conflict."" Lamar Alexander described the effect as ""this instant radicalizing of positions to the left and
the right.""
Both Alexander and Gregg said that the Senate had been further polarized by the rising number of senators—now nearly
fifty—who come from the House, rather than from governorships or other positions where bipartisan coOperation is still
permissible. ""A lot of senators don't understand the history or tradition of the institution,"" Gregg said. ""Substantive,
thoughtful, moderate discussion is pushed aside.""
Encumbered with aides, prodded by hourly jolts from electronic media, racing from the hearing room to the caucus lunch
to the Power Hour to the airport, senators no longer have the time, or perhaps the inclination, to get to know one
another—least of all, members of the other party. Friendships across party lines are more likely among the few spouses
who live in Washington. After Udall joined the Senate, last year, he was invited to dinner by Alexander, because Jill
Cooper Udall and Honey Alexander had become friends through a women's social club. It remains the only time Udall has
set foot in the house of a Republican senator. (Vice-President Joe Biden, in his autobiography, recalls that, in the
seventies, a bipartisan group of senators and their wives hosted a monthly dinner: ""In those days Democrats and
Republicans actually enjoyed each other's company."") When I asked Chris Dodd how well he knew, for example, Jim
DeMint, Dodd said, ""Not at all. Whereas Jesse Helms and I knew each other pretty well."" He repeated something that Jon
Kyl, the Republican whip, from Arizona, had recently said to him: ""There's no trust."" Dodd, whose father was a senator,
went on, ""That's really all there is—this place really operates on that. I don't think anyone would argue with that
conclusion. And if that's missing.
There remains a veneer—badly chipped—of comity. On the floor, senators still refer to members of the opposing party as
""friends."" Gregg described Kent Conrad, a Democrat from North Dakota, as ""one of my best friends in the Senate,"" and
both Gregg and Alexander ticked off examples of little-known legislation that they are currently working on with
Democrats; Alexander and Ben Cardin, of Maryland, have introduced a bill to ban mountaintop-removal coal mining. Udall
noted that he had become friendly with John McCain when they went on a congressional tour of Iraq. But opportunities to
bond are rare. On the first floor of the Capitol, there is a private dining room for senators, the ""inner sanctum,"" where
Republicans and Democrats used to have lunch (at separate tables, but in the same room). In the seventies, old bulls
such as James Eastland, Hubert Humphrey, and Jacob Javits held court there; later, Daniel Patrick Moynihan did. ""You
learned, and also you found out what was going on,"" Dodd said, adding, ""It's awfully difficult to say crappy things about
someone that you just had lunch with."" These days, the inner sanctum is nearly always empty. Senators eat lunch in their
respective caucus rooms with members of their party, or else ""downtown,"" which means asking donors for money over
steak and potatoes at the Monocle or Charlie Palmer. The tradition of the ""caucus lunch"" was instituted by Republicans in
the fifties, when they lost their majority; Democrats, after losing theirs in 1980, followed suit. Caucus lunches work
members on both sides into a state of pep-rally fervor. During one recent Republican lunch, Jim Bunning referred to Harry
Reid as an idiot. ""At least he had the courtesy to do it behind closed doors,"" Alexander joked, adding, ""We spend most of
our time in team meetings deciding what we're going to do to each other.""
In 2007, Alexander and Lieberman started a series of bipartisan Tuesday breakfasts. ""They kind of dwindled off during the
health-care debate,"" Alexander said. Udall has tried to revive the Wednesday inner-sanctum lunch. For the first few
months, only Democrats attended. Then, one Wednesday in May, Susan Collins, the Maine Republican, showed up,
joking nervously about being a turncoat; to protect her reputation, her presence was kept secret.
These efforts at resurrecting dead customs are as self-conscious and, probably, as doomed as the get-togethers of lovers
who try to stay friends after a breakup. Ira Shapiro, a Washington lawyer and a former aide to Senator Gaylord Nelson, of
Wisconsin, put it this way: ""Why would they want to have lunch together when they hate each other?""
The upper chamber of Congress was a constitutional compromise between popular sovereignty and state sovereignty.
The Senate was designed, as part of the separation of powers, to check the impulses of the House and the popular will.
For some Federalists, it also had an aristocratic purpose: to collect knowledge and experience, and to guard against a
levelling spirit that might overtake the majority. When Alexis de Tocqueville visited the Senate, in 1832, he was deeply
impressed by the quality of its members: ""They represent only the lofty thoughts [of the nation] and the generous instincts
animating it, not the petty passions."" But he also recognized that ""a minority of the nation dominating the Senate could
completely paralyze the will of the majority represented in the other house, and that is contrary to the spirit of
constitutional government."" As long as the Senate continued to be composed of America's most talented statesmen,
Tocqueville implied, it would restrain its own anti-democratic potential.
Robert A. Caro, in ""Master of the Senate,"" the third volume of his life of Lyndon Johnson, argues that after the Civil War •
the Senate was captured by wealthy and sectional interests, ending a more high-minded age when Daniel Webster, Henry
Clay, and John C. Calhoun engaged in brilliant debate. Aside from spasms of legislation at the start of the Presidencies of
Woodrow Wilson and Franklin Roosevelt, Caro writes, the Senate remained controlled by an alliance of Southern racists
and Republican corporate shills, and was ""the dam against which the waves of social reform dashed themselves in vain—
the chief obstructive force in the federal government."" By the fifties, the Senate had become far more conservative than
the public. And not just conservative: William S. White, in his 1956 book ""Citadel,"" called the Senate ""to a most peculiar
degree, a Southern Institution . . . growing at the heart of this ostensibly national assembly"" and ""the only place in the
country where the South did not lose the war.""
By mid-century, it had become a journalistic cliché to call the Senate broken. Otto Preminger's 1962 film ""Advise and
Consent,"" based on the novel by Allen Drury, is about the Senate of that period, and it presents Democrats and
Republicans as equally amoral, calculating, and power-hungry. But the institution, as depicted by Preminger, still works, in
its way: though the deals stink, they get cut. The senators know their colleagues and the rules; they back-stab one
another in the lunchroom, then drink cocktails and play cards on Saturday nights. There are no lobbyists, no fund-raisers,
no media, no constituents—only senators' intricate relations with one another. The Senate is its own world.
In a memoir, Johnson's longtime aide Harry McPherson recalls learning that the Senate's ""famous 'club' atmosphere is
based on the members' mutual acceptance of responsibility and concentration on the tasks at hand. . . . They thrust hard
at one another in debate over serious matters,"" but, he writes, ""understanding and accommodation in the ordinary course
of the Senate day was essential to sanity."" Johnson, the most powerful Majority Leader in history, bent the Senate to his
will and forced it to become more efficient. He saw his colleagues as either ""whales""—the heavyweight chairmen who
negotiated legislation—or ""minnows,"" the followers who went along with the brokered deals. And when, in 1958, a
formidable new class of liberal Democrats entered the Senate—including Edmund Muskie, Eugene McCarthy, and Philip
Hart—the legislative machinery began to produce reform. Michael Janeway, the author of ""The Fall of the House of
Roosevelt,"" worked as a summer staff member between 1958 and 1962. ""They used to talk to each other—that's my most
vivid recollection,"" he said. ""If Wayne Morse talked of constitutional law on the floor, the Southerners would come in to
hear him. The same with Hubert Humphrey on farm policy. My strongest impression was of it being a deliberative body,
drawing each other out—sometimes pedantically."" Senators who ran for office in order to work on foreign policy, social
welfare, or urbanization had to win credibility with the whales. ""But if you wanted to do something there was a mechanism
by which you could do it,"" Janeway said.
In the sixties and seventies, Southern-conservative control was broken by a coalition of left-of-center Democrats and
moderate Republicans. Donald Ritchie, the Senate historian, who started working there in 1976, described the Senate of
those decades as ""a bipartisan liberal institution."" The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was written largely out of the office of the
Republican Minority Leader, Everett Dirksen. Every major initiative—voting rights, open housing, environmental law,
campaign reform—enjoyed bipartisan support. In the rare event of a filibuster, the motion to end debate was often filed
jointly by leaders of both parties. When Medicare—that government takeover of health care for the elderly—was passed,
in 1965, it won 70-24.
The Senate's momentum nurtured superb talent: William Fulbright, Everett Dirksen, Henry Jackson, Frank Church,
Howard Baker. In 1969, George McGovern chaired a select committee on hunger that actually held bipartisan ""field
hearings"" in poor regions, calling witnesses in migrant labor camps, and then, with Bob Dole's indispensable support,
greatly expanded the food-stamp program. The intensity of senatorial purpose in those years must strike today's
legislators as profoundly humbling. After Joe Biden came to the Senate, in 1973, Hubert Humphrey took him aside and
said, ""You have to pick an issue that becomes yours. That's how you attract your colleagues to follow you, Joe. That's
how you demonstrate your bona fides. Don't be a gadfly."" Humphrey's career advice: ""You should become Mr. Housing.
Housing is the future.""
The Senate's modern decline began in 1978, with the election of a new wave of anti-government conservatives, and
accelerated as Republicans became the majority in 1981. ""The Quayle generation came in, and there were a number of
people just like Dan—same generation, same hair style, same beliefs,"" Gary Hart, the Colorado Democrat, recalled. ""They
were harder-line. They weren't there to get along with Democrats. But they look accommodationist compared to
Republicans in the Senate today."" Church, McGovern, Javits, and Birch Bayh were gone. Ira Shapiro, the former aide,
who is writing a book about the Senate of the sixties and seventies, said, ""It was a huge loss of the most experienced,
accomplished senators being replaced by neophytes. All of a sudden, in 1981, more than half the Senate had been there
less than six years."" He added, ""The shattering of the great Senate has long-term effects that keep showing up. It gets
worse over time, but it just never gets restored. There was a phrase I heard from Helms and the younger ones: 'Others
didn't want to make waves; I wanted to drain the swamp.'""
After C-SPAN went on the air, in 1979, the cozy atmosphere that encouraged both deliberation and back-room deals
began to yield to transparency and, with it, posturing. ""So Damn Much Money,"" a recent book by the Washington Post
reporter Robert G. Kaiser, traces the spectacular rise of Washington lobbying to the same period. Liberal Republicans
began to disappear, and as Southern Democrats died out they were replaced by conservative Republicans. Bipartisan
coalitions on both wings of the Senate vanished. The institutionalist gave way to the free agent, who controlled his own
fund-raising apparatus and media presence, and whose electoral base was a patchwork of single-issue groups. Members
of both parties—Howard Metzenbaum, the Ohio Democrat; Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican—took to
regularly using the Senate's rules to tie up business for narrowly ideological reasons. The number of filibusters shot up in
the eighties and continued to rise in the following decades, as the parties kept alternating control of the Senate and
escalating a procedural arms race, routinely blocking the confirmation of executive and judicial appointees. Democrats
filibustered Republican nominees to the bench; then Republicans threatened to ban the filibuster in such cases—the so-
called ""nuclear option."" Older members were perturbed when, in 2004, the Republican Majority Leader, Bill Frist, went to
South Dakota to campaign against the Democratic Minority Leader, Tom Daschle (who went on to lose). A few years
earlier, such an action would have been unthinkable.
The weakened institution could no longer withstand pressures from outside its walls; as money and cameras rushed in,
independent minds fell more and more in line with the partisans. Rough parity between the two parties meant that every
election had the potential to make or break a majority, crushing the incentive to cooperate across the aisle. The Senate,
no longer a fount of ideas, became a backwater of the U.S. government. During the Clinton years, the main action was
between the White House and the Gingrich House of Representatives; during the Bush years, the Republican Senate
majority abdicated the oversight role that could have placed a vital check on executive power.
Norman Ornstein, a congressional expert at the American Enterprise Institute, said that the Senate has increasingly
become populated by ""ideologues and charlatans."" He went on, ""When we do get good people who come in, they very
quickly get ground up by the dynamic and the culture of the parties. And once you get there, look at what it takes to stay
there."" He spoke of Charles Grassley, the Iowa Republican, who, nearing the end of his career, spent much of last year
working closely with his friend Max Baucus on the health-care bill. Then, in August, Grassley went home and, faced with
angry Republican voters and the prospect of a primary challenge from the right, started warning about ""pulling the plug on
Grandma."" Ornstein added that similar pressures had led John McCain to begin ""altering his behavior and abandoning
every issue, including campaign-finance reform.""
One morning in April, I visited Harry McPherson, the former L.B.J. aide, at the offices of the legal and lobbying firm D. L.
A. Piper, in downtown Washington. McPherson, who is eighty, had on his desk the firm's spiral-bound directory for the
111th Congress. I asked him who, in Johnsonian terms, were the whales of the current Senate. McPherson ran his finger
down the list of senators. He did it again. ""I'm trying here, looking for a remote descendant. Judas Priest, look at this."" He
was stumped. ""Well, I see some good people, I see some people who are going to get coalitions together over time."" He
put the directory aside. ""I'm just having the damnedest time.""
Down the hall from McPherson's office was that of Mel Martinez, a former Republican senator from Florida; he was hired
last year, two weeks after resigning his Senate seat without completing his first term. (He has since moved on to
JPMorgan Chase.) William Cohen, the former Maine senator and Secretary of Defense, has an office downstairs. Tom
Daschle works at D. L. A. Piper; his predecessor as Democratic leader, George Mitchell, was the firm's chairman, until
President Obama appointed him to be his Middle East envoy. One feature of the diminished U.S. senator is the ease with
which he moves from legislating to lobbying. Between 1998 and 2004, half the senators who left office became lobbyists.
In 2007, Trent Lott, a Republican leader in the Senate less than a year into his fourth term, abruptly resigned and formed
a lobbying firm with former Senator John Breaux, just a few weeks before a new law took effect requiring a two-year
waiting period between serving and lobbying.
When you spend your days at the Senate, it's easy to forget about everything else. The House of Representatives seems
miles away (it's just down a corridor and across the rotunda), the White House is another country, and actual foreign
countries are unimaginable. The place remains insular, labyrinthine, and opaque—even physically. Senators commute
thirty seconds between their offices and the chamber by electric subway cars that run along a tunnel under Constitution
Avenue. Many signs are misleading or obsolete (the gilded lettering over the visitors' gallery says ""Men's Gallery""), and
the Capitol is filled with secret passageways and spare rooms, called hideaways, doled out according to seniority, where
senators can read, drink, doze, and wait for the buzzer announcing an imminent vote. The most pervasive authority over
the institution is not the Constitution or the Bible but, rather, an impenetrable sixteen-hundred-page tome, by Floyd M.
Riddick, called ""Senate Procedure: Precedents and Practices,"" which only the late Robert Byrd, of West Virginia, was
known to have read in its entirety. The procedures are so abstruse that a parliamentarian must sit below the presiding
officer and, essentially, tell him or her what to say.
After half a century, the picture given by Preminger's ""Advise and Consent"" is still faintly visible. ""The Senate, by its
nature, is a place where consensus reigns and personal relationships are paramount,"" Lamar Alexander said. ""And that's
not changed."" Which is exactly the problem: it's a self-governing body that depends on the reasonableness of its
members to function. Sarah Binder, a congressional scholar at George Washington University, said, ""To have a chamber
that rules by unanimous consent—it's nutty! Especially when you've got Jim Bunning to please.""
In 2006 and 2008, sixteen Democrats entered the Senate, giving the Party its current majority of fifty-nine to forty-one
(counting two independents). They include moderates, like Jon Tester, of Montana, and Mark Warner, of Virginia; liberals,
like Sherrod Brown, of Ohio, and Sheldon Whitehouse, of Rhode Island; policy specialists, like Amy Klobuchar, of
Minnesota, and Jeff Merkley; and iconoclasts, like Claire McCaskill. Their interest in legislating has won the admiration of
senior senators. ""If they can stay, I think they'll be terrific,"" Chris Dodd said. ""My worry is they won't stay. Because it's not
productive.""
The Democratic class of 2008 arrived with President Obama, expecting to usher in 6 dynamic new era. Instead, their
young Senate careers have passed in a daily slog of threatened filibusters and ""secret holds""—when a senator
anonymously objects to bringing an appointment up for a vote, which requires unanimous consent. On April 20th, Claire
McCaskill took the trouble to read off the names of fifty-six Obama nominees languishing in the limbo of secret holds, and
Jon Kyl objected to every one of them. Just getting a bill to the floor for debate can require days of tactical gamesmanship
between the party leaders. There were times when Warner wondered if anyone had ever quit in the first year. Michael
Bennet said, ""We find ourselves at a moment in our history when the questions are huge ones, not small ones, and where
things have been put off for a really long period of time."" He mentioned the national debt, energy policy, and the financial
crisis. ""Yet you have a Senate that's designed not to advance change but to slow it.""
We were talking in his hideaway, a windowless room in the Capitol basement, which had a mini-fridge stocked with bottled
water, black leatherette furniture circa 1962, and a TV tuned to C-SPAN2 on mute; Senator Kyl's mouth was moving.
Bennet, the former superintendent of schools in Denver, was appointed to a vacant seat in 2009, and already has to
defend it this year. He described the Senate with the dry bluntness of an outsider who hasn't allowed himself to grow too
attached. Bennet repeated a story he had heard. about a new congressman giving his maiden speech: ""And then some
more veteran guy came over and said, 'Son, you're talking like this place is on the level. It's not on the level.' As the fifteen
months or so have gone by that I've been here, the less on the level it seems.""
Earlier this year, the Senate's procedural absurdities became national news twice in one month. On February 4th,
Con gressDaily reported that Richard Shelby, an Alabama Republican, was secretly blocking the confirmation of seventy
Obama appointees over a dispute involving defense earmarks for his•state. (His tactics exposed, Shelby—whose office
maintains that he was responsible for fewer than fifty holds—lifted all but three.) Later that month, Bunning spent several
days and a late night on the Senate floor, filibustering to prevent benefits from being paid to millions of unemployed
Americans. When Merkley tried to reason with him, Bunning responded, ""Tough shit."" (Eventually, Republicans persuaded
Bunning to stop.)
These incidents elicited a brief outcry, but the extent of the Senate's routine folly remains largely hidden. For example,
Grassley and Ron Wyden, of Oregon, have been trying since 1997 to end the practice of secret holds, without success. In
2007, the Senate passed a bill banning secret holds that last longer than six days. But to get around the ban two or more
senators can pass the hold back and forth—it's called ""rolling holds""—and their party leader facilitates the game by
keeping their names secret.
Many of the Senate's antique rules and precedents have been warped beyond recognition by the modern pressures of
partisanship. The hold, for example, was a courtesy extended to senators in the days of horse travel, when they needed
time to get back to Washington and read a bill or question an appointee before casting their vote. Sarah Binder, who co-
authored a book on the filibuster, calls the procedure a historical accident: in 1806, the Senate got rid of a little-used rule
that allowed the ""previous question"" to be called to a vote. Suddenly, there was no inherent limit on debate, and by the
eighteen-thirties senators had begun taking advantage of this loophole, derailing the proceedings by getting up and talking
until their voice, legs, or bladder gave out. (The word ""filibuster' comes from vrijbuiter—old Dutch for ""looter."")
In 1917, Woodrow Wilson, with his wartime legislative agenda blocked by filibusters, forced the Senate to pass Rule XXII,
which allowed a two-thirds majority to bring a floor debate to an end with a ""cloture"" vote. For decades, the rule was rarely
used; between 1919 and 1971, there were only forty-nine cloture votes, fewer than one per year. In the seventies and
eighties, the annual average rose to about a dozen. (Frustration with this increase led the Senate, in 1975, to lower the
threshold for cloture to sixty votes.) In the nineties and early aughts, the average went up to twenty-five or thirty a year, as
both parties escalated their use of the filibuster when they found themselves in the minority. After the Republicans lost
their majority in 2006, filibusters became everyday events: there were a hundred and twelve cloture votes in 2007 and
2008, and this session Republicans are on target to break their own filibuster record.
The tally of cloture votes reflects only a small fraction of senatorial obstruction. Three hundred and forty-five bills passed
by the House have been prevented from even coming up for debate in the Senate. ""Why?"" Steny Hoyer, the outraged
Democratic Majority Leader of the House, asked me. ""Because they do not do their business in a way that facilitates
noncontroversial things. Thankfully, the House of Representatives is not becoming the Senate."" Last week, six House
Democrats expressed their displeasure with the upper chamber by staging a sit-in of sorts on the Senate floor.
Seventy-six nominees for judgeships and executive posts have been approved by committees but, because of blocks,
haven't come up for a vote in the full Senate, leaving courtrooms idle and jobs unfilled across the upper levels of the
Obama Administration. (The Democrats also practiced the art of blocking nominees during the Bush Administration.)
There's often no objection to the individual being blocked: after an eight-month hold, Martha Johnson, nominated to run
the General Services Administration, was confirmed 96-0. On an issue like health-care reform, when the objection was
substantive, Republicans ransacked Riddick's ""Senate Procedure"" for every conceivable way to delay a debate and vote.
Judd Gregg even sent a memo on stalling tactics to his Republican colleagues. Tom Coburn demanded the reading aloud
of an entire seven-hundred-and-sixty-seven-page amendment proposed by Bernie Sanders, the Vermont socialist; Senate
clerks, working in half-hour shifts, were three hours into the chore when Sanders withdrew the amendment in frustration.
Under McConnell, Republicans have consistently consumed as much of the Senate's calendar as possible with legislative
maneuvering. The strategy is not to extend deliberation of the Senate's agenda but to prevent it. Tom Harkin, who first
proposed reform of the filibuster in 1995, called his Republican colleagues ""nihilists,"" who want to create chaos because it
serves their ideology. ""If there's chaos, things will tend toward simple solutions,"" Harkin said. ""In chaos people don't listen
to reason."" McConnell did not respond to requests for an interview, but he has often argued that the Republican strategy
reflects the views of a majority of Americans. In March, he told the Times, ""To the extent that they""—the Democrats—
""want to do things that we think are in the political center and would be helpful to the country, we'll be helpful. To the
extent they are trying to turn us into a Western European country, we are not going to be helpful.""
One of the mysteries of the Senate is how Mitch McConnell has been able to keep his members in line, on vote after vote.
Why do moderates with years of experience and their own power base back home—Richard Lugar, of Indiana; Susan
Collins, of Maine; George Voinovich, of Ohio—keep siding with the more extreme members of their caucus? Alexander
said that McConnell listens well to all his members, adding, ""When you have your back against the wall and the gallows
are hanging in front of you, it tends to unify. Operating with forty members—it concentrates the mind.""
Lindsey Graham described to the Times how McConnell exhorted his caucus after the disastrous 2008 election: ""He said
if we didn't stick together on big things, we wouldn't be relevant."" Last December, the Republicans decided to filibuster a
military-spending bill in order to delay the looming vote on health care until as close to Christmas as possible. Thad
Cochran, the Republican ranking member of the Appropriations Committee, promised Daniel Inouye, the chairman, that
he wouldn't join the effort. But at the last minute Cochran, who has been in the Senate since 1979 and brings
disproportionate amounts of defense money to Mississippi, told Reid that his leadership wouldn't allow him to vote with
the Democrats and end the filibuster—even on a matter of national security. (The Democrats were able to impose cloture,
and the vote on health care finally took place on Christmas Eve.)
Republican defections have been rare. In early 2009, Collins and Olympia Snowe, also of Maine, voted for the stimulus
bill, along with Arlen Specter (who promptly switched parties). Snowe also voted for the Finance Committee's health-care-
reform bill last October, the only Republican to do so. But in December, at the pivotal moment, she voted against the
version that went before the full Senate. ""I wasn't interested in expanding this program beyond the Finance Committee
version—it grew by a thousand pages,"" Snowe said. She wasn't included in the negotiations with White House officials
that took place in an elegant conference room across from Reid's suite of offices, and said that the Democrats ""did not
accept any of my proposals. As I said to the President, it was all windup and no pitch."" McConnell was able to exploit her
alienation. A friend of Snowe cited another reason for her reversal: ""She actually said to me once that she had never felt
the pressure that she felt on health care, never before had that pressure been quite as evident to her or quite as real or
troubling. Kyl and McConnell were saying things like 'You just can't let us down, we're all in this together. You're a senior
Republican member of this caucus, and you just have to hang tough with us. We expect it and you're going to do it.' ""
Reid doesn't use such tough tactics; he has achieved his position, in spite of his public shortcomings, by being the senator
who helped other Democrats, always answered their calls, and got them what they wanted through masterly
maneuvering. This has made him enormously popular within the Democratic caucus, but it doesn't give him the leverage
of McConnell, let alone of Lyndon Johnson.
In the current Senate, it has become normal for a handful of senators, sometimes representing just ten or twenty per cent
of the country's population, to hold everything up. And the status quo has become sufficiently frustrating that a few new
senators have considered a radical option: mutiny.
Tom Udall, who is sixty-two, is older than most freshman senators. He has the crow's-feet of a Westerner who has spent
time in the sun, and a slow, good-natured voice. His father, Stewart, was an Arizona congressman and the Interior
Secretary for Presidents Kennedy and Johnson; his uncle Mo was a legendary Arizona representative; his cousin Mark is
a freshman senator from Colorado. Udall served five terms in the House before winning a Senate seat from New Mexico,
in 2008. And yet he has the air of a political Candide—he is always earnest, capable of disappointment but not cynicism.
""I ran on the idea that the Senate should not be a graveyard for good ideas,"" he said. ""Then to be on the inside—the thing
that strikes you is how one senator can hold up the whole show.""
In his first year in office, Udall decided to do something audacious: he would try to change the Senate's rules.
Customarily, the rules continue session after session, and a provision in Rule XXII requires sixty-seven votes to amend
them, making it extremely difficult. (""Rule XXII is a Catch-22,"" Ted Kennedy used to joke.) Udall embraced a different
idea—the ""constitutional option."" Article I, Section 5 of the Constitution states that ""each House may determine the Rules
of its Proceedings"" at the beginning of the new Congress. So, in theory, a senator could take the floor next January and
propose debating its rules from scratch, including the filibuster. New rules could be passed with a simple majority. There's
even a precedent for this: moves to revisit the rules by invoking the constitutional option have been made three times,
most recently in 1975. Udall has spent much of the past year trying to build support for the idea.
At the request of Udall and others, Schumer, who is the chairman of the Rules Committee, has held a series of hearings
on the filibuster, calling witnesses such as Sarah Binder, the historian, and Walter Mondale, who was in the Senate when
the constitutional option was invoked in 1975. Dick Durbin, the second-highest-ranking Democrat, has organized working
groups among newer members on other internal reforms, such as ending secret holds and choosing committee chairs by
caucus vote rather than by seniority. (Lamar Alexander wryly suggested to me that Schumer and Durbin were competing
for the favor of newer members, in case Harry Reid loses his seat in the fall and they run against each other for Majority
Leader.)
For Republican institutionalists, such as Alexander and Gregg, the push for rules reform is folly. ""If you want a
parliamentary form of government, go over to the House,"" Gregg, who is about to retire, scoffed. ""Why even run for the
Senate?"" Udall's plan for next January, he said, would be a ""gigantic mistake.""
""They'll get over it,"" Alexander said of the Democrats' enthusiasm for rules reform. ""And they'll get over it quicker if they're
in the minority next January. Because they'll instantly see the value of slowing the Senate down to consider whatever they
have to say."" He added that the Senate ""may be getting done about as much as the American people want done."" The
President's ambitious agenda, after all, has upset a lot of voters, across the political spectrum. None of the Republicans I
spoke to agreed with the contention that the Senate is ""broken."" Alexander claimed that he and other Republicans were
exercising the moderating, thoughtful influence on legislation that the founders wanted in the Senate. ""The Senate wasn't
created to be efficient,"" he argued. ""It was created to be inefficient."" At one of the filibuster hearings, in April, Alexander,
sitting across the table from Udall, said that, for all the times the Democrats charge the Republicans with obstructing
legislation, ""we could say that's the number of times the majority has tried to cut off our right to debate, our right to offer
amendments, which is the essence of the Senate.""
Newcomers like Udall seem to think that the Senate has grown so absurd and extreme that some kind of reform is
inevitable. Perhaps they need more time to plumb the depths of the institution's intransigence. According to Sarah Binder,
a change in rules is extremely unlikely; Republicans would be implacably opposed to, say, weakening the filibuster, and
so would some Democrats, especially long-serving ones. ""I would oppose that,"" Chris Dodd said, adding of the freshmen,
""These are people who have never been in the minority."" For older Democrats, who have put in their years, grown adept
at working the rules, and now chair powerful committees, the reform impulse could be a threat. (Among senior senators,
the sole enthusiast for rules reform is Tom Harkin.) One senator spoke of the Senate as being divided not between
whales and minnows but, rather, between bulls and calves. The older Democrats are too accustomed to the Senate's
ways to share the frustrations of the newcomers; the handful of older moderate Republicans are too weak to challenge the
newer radicals who now dominate the caucus.
Even if the freshmen Democrats can somehow reform the filibuster next January, the Senate will remain a sclerotic,
wasteful, unhappy body. The deepest source of its problems is not rules and precedents but, rather, its human beings,
who have created a culture where Tocqueville's ""lofty thoughts"" and ""generous impulses"" have no place.
A few days after passing health-care reform, the Senate struggled to its feet to take on a second large task. Financial
regulatory reform should have been the easiest piece of major legislation of the Obama Presidency, the likeliest to win
real bipartisan support. The financial crisis had been catastrophic for millions of Americans, and after the 2008 bailout
Wall Street had become even more hated than the Senate was. In April, a lineup of bankers from Goldman Sachs
appeared before Senator Levin's subcommittee on investigations, and managed to appear as arrogant, callous, and
evasive as their reputations had suggested. The public demanded action. Some Republicans had a genuine desire to
pass a bill. If health-care reform had been a war of attrition, financial reform was a promising liaison.
The affair began with a Republican, Bob Corker, and a Democrat, Mark Warner—both multimillionaires serving their first
term, both considered centrists. Corker is a small, dapper former construction magnate who became the mayor of
Chattanooga; Warner is a tall, preppily dressed former telecommunications entrepreneur who became the governor of
Virginia. Chris Dodd, the Banking Committee chairman, assigned them to work together on the section of the bill having to
do with the liquidation of troubled firms—making sure that there would never be another taxpayer bailout. They worked
through the winter, in Warner's office, in Corker's office, over dinner, sometimes without staff, as if they were members of
a Senate from the past. They hosted a series of afternoon seminars, inviting guests such as Ben Bernanke, Alan
Greenspan, and Sheila Bair. Corker and Warner were sometimes said to be the only Democrat and Republican still
talking to each other. In January, Business Week called them the Senate's ""Odd Couple."" By February, they had finished
their work.
Meanwhile, discussions about the entire bill between Dodd and Richard Shelby, the top Republican on the committee,
dragged on, repeatedly breaking down. Finally, on February 10th, Dodd called Corker, who, though he was one of the
committee's junior members, agreed to be the chairman's Republican negotiating partner. When Corker informed
McConnell and Shelby, they expressed surprise. ""It was an odd place to be,"" Corker recalled. ""And yet that night we
began meeting."" The junior Republican savored the rare experience of creating, rather than opposing, legislation. In
response, Shelby's conservative staff tried to undermine Corker, spreading rumors among Republicans and their lobbyists
that he was giving too much away. (A Shelby aide said that staff members were simply informing other Republicans of the
Party's line on financial reform.)
On March 10th, Dodd concluded that he had to move a bill to the floor. He called Corker and said, ""You've been a great
partner."" He was ending their talks after only a month. ""It's a little stunning, I've got to be honest,"" Corker told reporters
afterward. Someone close to the negotiations compared Corker to Dickens's Miss Havisham, unable to get over the
rebuff, forever awaiting the arrival of her groom, all her clocks stopped. Corker later said that Dodd had ended the talks
under pressure from the White House and other Democrats. Dodd said that Corker had been unable to bring any other
Republicans with him. ""Baloney,"" Corker said. ""If Dodd had reached an agreement with me, we'd've had at least twenty-
five Republican votes.""
The bill that Dodd brought before the Senate, after a year of discussions with Democrats and Republicans alike,
incorporated the bipartisan plan of Warner and Corker to prevent another bank bailout: setting up a fifty-billion-dollar fund,
paid for by the banks, to insure orderly liquidation, and establishing a risk council to detect warning signs of another crisis.
But in mid-April Mitch McConnell—who had just met with Wall Street executives in New York, and was now parroting
talking points from a memo written by the Republican strategist Frank Luntz—called it a ""partisan bill"" that ""will guarantee
perpetual taxpayer bailout of Wall Street banks."" McConnell presented a letter, signed by all forty-one Republicans,
suggesting that they would filibuster the financial-reform bill.
His remarks amounted to a repudiation of Corker's work as well as of Dodd's. The next day, April 15th, Corker pleaded
with his colleagues, in his Tennessee twang, ""Let's come to the floor and let's act like adults. Let's tone down the rhetoric.
Let's don't exaggerate the pluses or minuses. Let's do what the Senate was created to do. . . . We were supposed to be
the people that took some of the red-hot activities that sometimes come from the other body and sat down with cooler
heads and resolved the issues like adults. We can do that. As a matter of fact, I would say, if we cannot do that on
financial regulation, an issue that really doesn't have any real philosophical bearings to it . . ."" Corker didn't allow the
thought to ripen—he had already gone farther than almost any Republican would have dared.
Dodd spoke later in the day and completed Corker's speech: ""I know my friends on the other side of the aisle are faced
with a difficult choice between supporting their party leadership and participating in this complicated, difficult debate. I am
not naïve. I know that is a hard place to be. But if we can't act like U.S. senators for the sake of this issue . . . then why
are we even here?"" He went on, ""We work for an American public that is sick and tired of feeling like no one is looking out
for their interests, like the political hacks and lobbyists hold all the cards in these discussions. The minority seems intent
on proving them right. . . . I have been here a long time. I know this institution is better than that. I know there are friends
of mine on the other side of the aisle who care about this bill, who want to be a part of the debate, who want to be part of
the solution.""
In the same speech, Dodd joined the partisan fight, accusing McConnell of lying about the bill. Turning crimson-faced, he
chopped the air with his hand as he shouted, ""I have to ask myself, why did I go through this process over the last four or
five months, agreeing to much of what they were offering, and there is not a single political vote to show for it. . . . I have
to say to the younger members, the newer members coming along: be careful!""
Corker, having heard that Dodd was speaking, returned to the chamber and asked to respond. ""You and I went a long
way,"" Corker told Dodd. ""Then we stopped. On March 10th it ended. I understand that, look, you were losing Democrats
on your committee.""
""And I was not gaining Republicans,"" Dodd replied.
""You had one, and that is all you asked for when you started. I never said I could speak for anybody but myself. And I did
not leave the table."" Corker urged Dodd to keep talking to Republicans—their differences could be sorted out in a few
days.
But this was not McConnell's agenda. Instead, financial reform became a slightly more polite repeat of the health-care-
reform brawl: the Republicans threatened filibusters, the Democrats threatened all-nighters, and thousands of lobbyists
prowled the Capitol, charging their Wall Street clients more than a billion dollars. On April 28th, I was sitting in the ornate
Reception Room with Jim Manley, Reid's spokesman. On the other side of the wall, there was the noise of furniture
scraping across a tile floor. ""Those are cots being set up in the L.B.J. Room,"" Manley said. ""Very little happens around
here without a deadline."" The cots persuaded Republicans to allow the bill to move to the floor for debate. A few weeks
later, on May 20th, yet another filibuster was defeated by yet another cloture motion, and financial reform finally came to a
vote. It passed, 59-39. Only four Republicans had joined the majority. Corker wasn't among them. He had even voted for
an amendment, offered by his Republican colleague Jeff Sessions, of Alabama, that would have scrapped Corker's work
of many months with Warner.
""The idea of watching Bob Corker vote for the Sessions amendment!"" Dodd said afterward, sitting in his red-curtained
office, under a print of Holbein's portrait of Thomas More. ""It's the Senate, I guess."" McConnell's strategy of obstruction
had once again come close to succeeding, Dodd said, but he knew that a ""shrinking number"" of Republicans were
frustrated. The previous day, Dodd had said to Susan Collins, ""God, I would have loved to have you as my ranking
member on this."" Collins responded, ""We could have had such a great time on this bill.""
Warner, who said that he believed in bipartisanship because ""the American people don't trust either political party enough
to give them a blank check,"" was astonished that so few Republicans voted for financial reform. ""There was zero
substantive reason why this couldn't have been eighty votes,"" he said. I asked him why Bob Corker had voted no on the
bill. Warner started to talk about the consumer-protection title, and then said, ""If you want to vote against something, you
can always find your reasons.""
But Corker hadn't seemed to want to vote against it. He had spent months trying to act like a U.S. senator, alienating
himself from his own party and then the other party, and on the day of the vote he held the floor for the better part of thirty
minutes, as if he were still reluctant to let the effort go. ""I am obviously disappointed,"" he said. ""I think I have spent as
much time as any senator. . . on policy regarding our financial system. I think any bill—even this bill—has good things in
it. There is no question. And I appreciate the thrust. But I think there is a lot of overreaching, and I think not enough time
was spent on some of the core issues.""
As the senators cast their votes, I noticed Robert Kaiser, the author of ""So Damn Much Money,"" in the press gallery. I later
asked him if, with the passage of two big reform bills in three months, we were witnessing a possible renewal of the
Senate. ""If you can engage public opinion in a way politicians can understand, public opinion can still blow away money
and interest groups,"" he said. ""But over the past few decades the reflex has grown in the Senate that, all things
considered, it's better to avoid than to take on big issues. This is the kind of thing that drives Michael Bennet nutty: here
you've arrived in the United States Senate and you can't do fuck-all about the destruction of the planet.""
After the final vote on financial reform, the Republicans flew home, and the Democratic leaders held a press conference,
smiling before the microphones outside the Senate chamber. Reid said, ""For those who wanted to protect Wall Street, it
didn't work."" He then excused himself: he had to join Biden for a telephone fund-raiser with ""some Nevadans.""
Durbin said, ""I was stunned that only four Republicans would join us in passing this historic legislation. What does it take
to bring the Republican Party into the conversation about the future of America?""
Dodd, glowing with triumph, said, ""I wanted to demonstrate that the Senate of the United States could conduct its
business much as our founders intended. We did that.""
On July 21st, President Obama signed the completed bill. The two lasting achievements of this Senate, financial
regulation and health care, required a year and a half of legislative warfare that nearly destroyed the body. They
depended on a set of circumstances—a large majority of Democrats, a charismatic President with an electoral mandate,
and a national crisis—that will not last long or be repeated anytime soon. Two days after financial reform became law,
Harry Reid announced that the Senate would not take up comprehensive energy-reform legislation for the rest of the year.
And so climate change joined immigration, job creation, food safety, pilot training, veterans' care, campaign finance,
transportation security, labor law, mine safety, wildfire management, and scores of executive and judicial appointments on
the list of matters that the world's greatest deliberative body is incapable of addressing. Already, you can feel the Senate
slipping back into stagnant waters.
ILLUSTRATION: STEVE BRODNER
• Print
• E-Mail
• Feeds
Share:
• Facebook
• Twitter
• Digg
• More
To get more of The New Yorker's signature mix of politics, culture and the arts: Subscribe now
Related Links
Ask the Author: Join a live chat with George Packer about the Senate on Wednesday, August 4, at 3 P.M. E.T.
Read more http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/08/09/100809fa fact packer?printable=true#ixzz0vT1PYxi7"
5434,Yes they should have known.
5435,"Long New Yorker article on dysfunction of Senate
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
5436,ok
5437,"hes back at home at nyc apartment
apparently doing well
lauren will have on call list
B6"
5438,"MS -
We're hoping you'll be ok with taking one of the videos you were going to record tomorrow - the one for the Pakistani
audience - and instead deliver the remarks live in the Treaty Room, one of those things where you just pop out the side
door, make a statement, vamanose back through the doors
You have the time in the morning, we'd be dropping a video, and it will have ten times the impact. And to sweeten the
deal...
We can scrub BOTH flood related videos and merge their remarks into one live Treaty Room Statement
Please let us know so we can make the necessary changes and preparations.
PIR"
5439,"Below is the actual Rice statement
USUN PRESS RELEASE #157 August
2, 2010
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Statement by Ambassador Susan E. Rice, U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations, on Secretary
General Ban's Panel Concerning the May 31 Flotilla Incident
The United States welcomes today's announcement by UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of the
establishment of a Panel regarding the incident of May 31st- We thank both governments for the constructive
and cooperative spirit they have shown and the Secretary General for his leadership and determination. The
Panel, which has the support of both Israel and Turkey, will receive and review the reports of each
government's national investigation into the incident and make recommendations as to how to avoid such
incidents in the future. This Panel is not a substitute for those national investigations. It complements them,
affording Israel and Turkey the opportunity to present the conclusions of their investigations to the international
community. The focus of the Panel is appropriately on the future and on preventing such incidents from
recurring. The United States also hopes that the Panel can serve as a vehicle to enable Israel and Turkey to
move beyond the recent strains in their relationship and repair their strong historic ties.
The United States expects that the Panel will operate in a transparent and credible manner and that its work will
be the primary method for the international community to review the incident, obviating the need for any
overlapping international inquiries. The United States welcomes the naming of the former Prime Minister of
New Zealand, Geoffrey Palmer, as Chair and the outgoing President of Colombia, Alvaro Uribe, as Vice-Chair.
We look forward to the announcement of the two additional members from Israel and Turkey.
###
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.
This email is UNCLASSIFIED."
5440,Fyi
5441,"During the past year we have discussed the size of the Germany PD budget and the fact that it did not reflect current
priorities. EUR reviewed the budget and made the decision to cut the German PD budget by 30% and reallocate the
funding to other areas, primarily Eastern Europe. As you will see from the email below and the attached memo, Mission
Germany responded by reviewing all their PD operations and developing an entirely new approach based on the PD
strategic framework we rolled out earlier this year. I think they did an excellent job and we will be using this as a model
for other Missions as we go forward.
Let me know what you think.
jm"
5445,"MS -
We're hoping you'll be ok with taking one of the videos you were going to record tomorrow - the one for the Pakistani
audience - and instead deliver the remarks live in the Treaty Room, one of those things where you just pop out the side
door, make a statement, vamanose back through the doors
You have the time in the morning, we'd be dropping a video, and it will have ten times the impact. And to sweeten the
deal...
We can scrub BOTH flood related videos and merge their remarks into one live Treaty Room Statement
Please let us know so we can make the necessary changes and preparations.
PIR"
5446,Ever since you've become a Mother-in-Law you've been very funny
5448,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence
En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am ""MONDAY"" MEETING w/ASSISTANT SECRETARIES
10:00 am Principals Conference Room 7516
10:00am STATEMENT ON PAKISTANI FLOOD RELIEF
10:15am Treaty Room
10:15 am VIDEOS (7)
10:25 am George Marshall Room, 7th Floor
10:30 am OFFICE TIME
11:00 am Secretary's Office
11:00 am MEETING w/SENATOR JOHN KERRY
11:30 am Secretary's Office
11:30 am OFFICE TIME
2:15 pm Secretary's Office
2:15 pm COURTESY VISIT w/GENERAL JAMES 1VIATTIS
3:00 pm Secretary's Office
3:00 pm MEETING w/JUDITH McHALE
3:30 pm Secretary's Office
3:30 pm OFFICE TIME
6:00 pm Secretary's Office
6:00 pm DEPART State Department
En route Private Residence
6:10 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5449,FYI. Will keep you posted.
5450,fyi
5453,"Sen Mitchell proposes putting out the following statement tomorrow. We would respond on specific commitments on
Ramat Shlomo if asked.
Special Envoy Mitchell left the Middle East on Sunday, where he completed the first round of proximity talks with Israeli
and Palestinian leaders. The talks were serious and wide-ranging.
Special Envoy Mitchell emphasized the importance of making progress in the proximity talks and of moving to direct
negotiations as soon as possible. We have received commitments from both sides, and we have made assurances to
both sides, that are enabling us to move forward. The full scope of these discussions will remain private.
As both parties know, if either side takes significant actions during the proximity talks that we judge would seriously
undermine trust, we will respond to hold them accountable and ensure that negotiations continue.
Special Envoy Mitchell will return to the region next week to continue indirect negotiations with the parties."
5454,I think this is about right too.
5455,"After further back and forth, we've come up with a way to mention Ramat Shlomo and incitement to violence that
should be acceptable to both sides. The additional paragraph would read:
We have urged the parties to help create an atmosphere that is conducive to successful talks, and they are responding,
including President Abbas' statement that he will work against incitement of any sort and Prime Minister Netanyahu's
statement that there will be no construction at the Ramat Shlomo project for two years. They are both trying to move
forward in difficult circumstances and we commend them for that."
5456,I should add that this is still going back and forth.
5457,"You are all set, seats 3A and 3C on the 8:00pm.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State"
5458,"Mikulski, BAM (Mikulski) <BAM@Mikulski.senate.gov>
Wednesday, August 4, 2010 9:32 PM
Good news
Shortly after we talked. Got word that. Pres. Bill was coming to do an event for me. In oct. This the $$$ and juice we
need. Will thank him myself but if you see him first --- give him a bug 4 me H!! Great getting caught up
Sent from my BlackBerry Wireless Handheld"
5459,Fyi
5460,"May 9, 2010
For: Hillary"
5462,"You'll be getting the draft of the joint communique - with carefully haggled language on detentions - in your book
tonight. You'll also get a proposed Quartet statement on prox talks.
Happy Mothers Day!"
5463,"Importance:
fyi
McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Thursday, August 5, 2010 7:52 AM
H
FW: Ruto and the ""No"" team concede defeat in Kenya's Constitutional Referendum
High"
5464,"Fyi,"
5465,FYI — the Philippines compact was approved unanimously.
5466,"I know you're meeting with Peggy tom'w.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
5467,"FYI, a video and note that will make you smile.
Enjoy!
jm
1.Closing Wrap-up Video from Forum (produced by IIP and huge hit)
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uZ8kpXbql1c
2.Thank-you Letter from Cameroon Delegate to Embassy
Dear All,
Good morning from Washington DC. I trust that we are keeping well. I just want to use this opportunity to say that today
we come to the end of the program here on the President's Forum. All along this Forum and especially during the White
House meeting with President Obama, I have been asking myself what it means to be here in DC and to be representing
Cameroon at this forum?
I have recently come to the realization that the time is critical and that President Obama in his thinking about a new
Africa believes that young people whom we are, diverse and intelligently different can take little positive actions to
ensure that the next 50 years witnesses significant changes in our social processes, our political institutions, processes
and structures, our economic freedom, taking into consideration our cultural specificities.
While traveling to America, I kept imagining the moment when President Obama would tell us great and magical ways to
getting out of our current socio-economic and especially political hostage situations, but in all and after all the speeches,
conversations and interactions with Ordinary Americans like in the Southside of Washington DC, State Department Staff,
Senators, Secretary of State Clinton and President Obama, I noticed that America can only partner with us when we
decide to start thinking and acting differently in our quest for a better Cameroon and a better Africa.
This thinking differently is exemplified by the American Peace Corps, in the service leadership, the spirit of give back to
the nation and community and the transformation of challenges to opportunities in America and in many nations
around the world...
When our troubles and challenges seems gruesome and our vision blurred by the thought and fear of the unknown if we
dared, the one thing I come out with from this Forum is this, ""That we just have to Think, Speak out and above all, DARE
take some innovative ACTIONs to Be the change we want to see in our communities, nations and continent and commit
others to same by our examples...That we have to build strong networks and undertake advocacies as a group as
nothing has ever stopped a committed group of people to drive change aound the world.
The work to be done is enormous and challenging but sure the reward of every success like coming to America, to the
White House and meeting with President Obama is sweet. Therefore I come back to work to be the change I want to see
in Cameroon.
I thank you all for the opportunity."
5468,"Because of ash cloud flight issues, 1230 is earliest he can get there after landing.
I don't know about mccrystal."
5469,"McCrystal cancelled, he needs to be at the Pentagon much earlier than they had expected. Senator Mitchell's plane now
lands at 11:00am and asked for 12:30 or as soon as he can get to State.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State B6"
5470,"The ""doctrine of no surprises"" has become my personal mantra. Glad you like it. And Happy Mother's Day to you too!"
5472,"Thanks! Just back. Got waylaid for long detour around iceland due to volcano. - will be in touch with evryone in uk so
more later tomorrow...
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
5473,FYI
5474,"RCH talked to Lute, who said he would fix before it goes final, the whole thing is on hold thru Karzai, but we can expect
to see another version next week."
5475,"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Thursday, August 5, 2010 10:14 PM
Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Rodriguez, Miguel E
Ambassadors
We had 31 noms on the Exec Calendar as of tonight. The following 27 made it thru:
Jeffrey (Iraq)
Williams (Niger)
Carter (Cote d'Ivoire)
Feierstein (Yemen)
Reed-Rowe (Palau)
Moon (Bosnia)
Murray (Republic of Congo)
StoreIla (Zambia)
Likins (Peru)
McKinley (Colombia)
Dougherty (Burkina Faso)
Benjaminson (Gabon)
Connelly (Lebanon)
Smith (Greece)
Entwistle (Dem Rep Congo)
Wohlers (Cent Af Rep)
Fergin (E.Timor)
Owen (Sierra Leone)
Jackson (Cameroon)
Wolff (Chile)
Marcie! (Indonesia)
McCulley (Nigeria)
Bridgewater (Jamaica)
Bond (Lesotho)
Jones (Malaysia)
Powers (Powers)
Arreaga (Iceland)
The following 4 remain on the floor:
Ricciardone (Turkey)
Aponte (El Salvador)
Ford (Syria)
Yzaguirre (Dominican Republic)"
5476,Agree - as do others
5477,"My mom just wrote me an email about the interview that captured exactly what I thought watching the interview - you
have been through so much and would have been perfectly entitled just to pack it in after the election but instead, in my
mom's words, ""instead of feeling sorry for herself she takes the ball and runs with all the energy that she can summon in
the service of her country to the limit of her body ....and she dishes it out frankly without pussy footing around whether
to heads of State or media or major international conferences."" I felt VERY proud to be on your team. AM"
5478,"Tonight's announcement of a 700 bn euro bailout plan puts the secprez on hold, at least til we see how markets react."
5479,Great work
5481,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence
En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am MONDAY MEETING w/ASSISTANT SECRETARIES
10:00 am Principals Conference Room 7516
10:30 am ONE-ON-ONE MEETING w/AMBASSADOR KARL EHCENBERRY
11:00 am Secretary's Office
11:00 am BILATERAL w/ZIMBABWEAN PM MORGAN TSVANGIRAI
11:30 am Secretary's Conference Room *Camera Spray in Treaty Room preceding.
11:30 pm OFFICE TIME
6:30 pm Secretary's Office
6:45 pm DEPART State Department *En route Blair House
6:55 pm ARRIVE Blair House
7:00 pm PRIVATE DINNER w/AFGHAN PRESIDENT KARZAI
9:00 pm Blair House
9:05 pm (t) DEPART Blair House *En route Private Residence
9:20 pm (t) ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5482,come later...Sid
5483,"graduate,-howard-university-student-beats-the-odds-050710
Importance: High
B6"
5484,"sbwhoeop
Monday, May 10, 2010 4:52 PM
H
H: All still in play, by end of Monday. Sid
Gordon was convinced he had to sacrifice himself for any attempt to form a grand progressive coalition with the Lib-Dems.
Clegg had said during the campaign he would not deal with Gordon and he remained adamant. Peter, Alastair, Ed Balls,
and Ed Miliband met secretly with the LD team on Sunday. Gordon decided to fall on his sword today. The negotiations
between Labour and the LDs now are engaged with the same teams. The Tories at the same time also are negotiating.
Both offer competing plans for electoral reform that would give the LDs more representation in the future. If the LDs strike
a deal with the Tories Labour is unlikely to support it and campaign against that referendum. Cameron is strained right
now. His right does not approve of a deal while others push him to make an arrangement in order to attain power.
Cameron may be limited in how far he can go in his offer. But by no means is a Labour-LD deal certain or even probable,
even given Gordon's political suicide. The campaign for leader to replace Gordon begins as soon as the Labour-LD
negotiations are concluded. David is ready to go; he will face Ed Balls and possibly his brother Ed. If there is a coalition
that would tilt against Balls, who is seen as Gordon's heir and as an inappropriate PM, Gordon redux, to work with the
LDs. One of the Milibands will emerge. I still bet on David. So four days after the election, everything is still in play. Sid"
5485,"I am traveling overseas, with only intermittent access to my email. If you need to reach me urgently please contact Nora
Toiv, Toivnf@state.gov, 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych, laszczychj@state.gov, 202-647-5548.
Thank you
cdm"
5487,"Development PLAN - ExecSum.docx
As you may be aware, earlier this year, OIG issued a very negative report on our Public Diplomacy operations
throughout Africa. I have attached a copy of the action plan which Johnnie and his team developed to address the
issues raised in the report. The plan is a very deliberate effort to address the shortcomings identified by the 01G, do a
better job of integrating public diplomacy and public affairs into the whole AF Bureau, and deliver better PD and PA
work.
I think it is an excellent report and provides a good model for the bureaus as we endeavor to create a new direction for
Public Diplomacy."
5488,Roger - it's in there.
5491,I will prepare for you to sign tomorrow.
5492,"Madam Secretary,
As requested, below is a brief bio (compiled by DK, INR, and AF) of Kenyan Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs Richard
Momoima Onyonka, who you met in Krakow at the Community of Democracies. Please let me know if you would like
any further information or follow up on this.
Thanks,
Mike
Richard Momoima Onyonka is a Kenyan politician and belongs to the People's Democratic Party. Born in 1962 and
hailing from the Bogeka clan, VM Momoima has lived in Otamba, Nyamataro, Mosocho and Nairobi. In 1982, following
the failed Kenyan coup d'etat attempt to overthrow President Daniel Arap Moi's government, VM Momoima was among
the 900 people that were jailed. However, in 1984, he returned to the University of Nairobi and graduated with a
Bachelors degree in commerce a year later. After graduation, VM Momoima attended North Carolina State University
where he graduated with a Masters degree in management. He returned to Kenya in 1992 during the first multi party
elections to help his father (then incumbent MP for Kitutu Chache and Minister for Planning and National Development)
who was seeking re-election on a KANU (Kenya African National Union) ticket. VM Momoima's first political opportunity
arose when his father passed away in 1996, which prompted an election in which he lost to a new corner during the
party (KANU) nominations. Since the Kenyan parliamentary election in 2007, VM Momoima has represented the Kitutu
Chache Constituency in the National Assembly of Kenya.
A financial economist by profession, VM Momoima currently runs personal businesses in Nairobi and Kisii and has held
positions in the Kisii KANU branch. His priorities include economic empowerment, particularly for youth and women,
education, and poverty reduction.
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
B6"
5493,We have them.
5494,"Yes, I'll see if we can locate that"
5495,They came to you overnight.
5496,FYI — see below for update on UNFPA head selection process.
5497,Ok
5498,I'll get on all these. And yes you will have a teleprompter.
5499,"May 11, 2010
For: Hillary"
5502,"Just posted by the Guardian:
Many Labour MPs, including those from northern heartlands and Scotland, seem to be furious that they were not
consulted on the deal. One party member close to a leadership campaign said: ""The party is not a plaything of Lord
Mandelson."""
5503,"You were right about Vitamin A, no surprise (although a bit surprising that none of the experts noticed it). I've changed
it to oral rehydration therapy. I've also added ORT to the Jim Grant story.
Huma has a copy of the MDGs for you.
I hope it's a lovely event! They are VERY excited to have you there."
5505,Coalition with LDs
5506,"Gordon has resigned, left Downing St, Cameron now at Buckingham Palace seeing the Queen"
5507,"sbwhoeop
Tuesday, May 11, 2010 3:38 PM
H
Cameron leaves Queen, to arrive at Downing St momentarily, he is PM. Sid"
5508,"Of course, you'll speak to the new foreign secretary William Hague as soon as he is appointed, undoubtedly tomorrow.
But you might wish to put in calls, perhaps tonight, but perhaps even better tomorrow, after everyone has had a night, to
Gordon, David and Shaun. Sid"
5509,FYI.
5510,"Jim just called to weigh in on the Dal call sheet.
More generally, he thinks it should be an upbeat call"
5511,Ok
5512,"today
Madam Secretary,
Ops has confirmed your call with Hungarian Prime Minister Bajnai at 7:30 a.m. this morning.
Regards,
Courtney"
5513,"The prez has agreed to participate if we can nail down assurance. That means a call from you to their guy Monday
(possibly Sun) and follow up by the prez."
5514,Will do
5515,"RELEASE IN PART B5,B6"
5516,Will do
5517,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, May 12, 2010 7:22 AM
Beale, Courtney A Kramer; H
S_SpecialAssistants
Re: The Secretary's call with Hungarian Prime Minister Gordon Bajnai confirmed for 7:30
am today
Hrc, sorry but this is back on.
Time was offered yesterday and they didn't confirm."
5518,"am today
No u r not. That's old and wrong."
5520,"As I mentioned in an email yesterday, the team is proposing that you call Bibi on Monday afternoon. We can set it up if
you give the green light."
5521,"I am traveling overseas and only have sporadic access to my email. If you need immediate assistance, please call State
Department Operations at 202-647-1512 and ask for Joanne Lasczcych who can assist you.
cdm"
5522,Fyi
5523,"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sunday, August 8, 2010 6:48 AM
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
FW: aid workers
im"
5524,"came to the beach on friday nite to having a good time - hope wedding was great.
nothing to report other than chris will stay through next fri
also talking to torn
On Sat, Aug 7, 2010 at 7:31 PM, H <HDR22@c1intonemail.com> wrote:
I'm in a car (on the way to another wedding!) on Long Island for the next hour. You can call me thru Ops on
my bb. Hope you had a good day.
B6"
5525,"We're preparing a statement to go out from you once it's confirmed that six of the deceased are Americans. Will send
to you once otherwise fully cleared."
5526,"+ Philippe
We believe you should go on camera tomorrow.
We have been working the written statement overnight and will put it out shortly."
5527,"Just spoke with David and RI. The bodies have been recovered and identified. Phillipe is working with Kabul on your
written statement. I raised the possibilty of your going on camera tomorrow and have asked Phillipe to weigh in on
message and timing.
Jm"
5528,"Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Sunday, August 8, 2010 9:45 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J; H; McHale, Judith A
Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma; Valmoro, Lona 1
Re: aid workers
I just emailed you about statement"
5529,Ok
5531,"Cc: Jake Sullivan; megrooney(
MS-
Below is a statement drafted by Megan, reviewed and edited by me, Jake, SRAP and others, and with your ok will go out
immediately (pis ignore any spacing or formatting issues):
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON
###"
5533,That's right. You should leave here at 7:45 to be safe to catch the 11.
5534,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov>
Sunday, August 8, 2010 1:46 PM
Fw: UNFPA - additional information
Below is further info on the three UNFPA names."
5535,"am today
It shall be fixed."
5537,"How Come we havent?
This is what we are up against.
Betrayed
They said we were there to save Afghanistan's women. So how
come we haven't?
BY VALERIE M. HUDSON, PATRICIA LEIDL I MAY 10, 2010
One day in November 2009, in Helmand province's capital of Lashkar Gah, a group of Afghan widows and divorcees met
with Patricia, who had been commissioned to write a series of success stories for the U.S. Agency for International
Development (USAID). All the women were in their 20s, 30s, and 40s but looked to be in their 60s. Until very recently,
none of them could work because they possessed no marketable skills, could neither read nor write, and were at risk of
being killed if they left their homes. A number of women said that, before the program -- which focused on tailoring and
basic literacy -- their children used to weep at night from hunger.
COMMENTS (22) SHARE:
Twitter
Reddit
Buzz
EMore...
As Patricia prepared to leave, the women fluttered around her like moths, touching her sleeves and speaking all at once.
'What are they saying?"" Pat asked the young Pashto-speaking interpreter. ""They are telling you to go back to your
country and to ask your people not to abandon them. The women of Afghanistan don't want you to leave. They will quite
literally die if the Taliban return,"" she said.
In a recent question-and-answer period at one of our universities, Brigham Young, a student asked Gen. David Petraeus
whether anyone thought to ask the women of Afghanistan how they felt about U.S. hopes to incorporate ""reformed""
Taliban into governance structures as the Americans leave.
Carefully avoiding the word ""women,"" the general assured the questioning student that only ""moderate"" Taliban would be
eligible for such rehabilitation. Left unaddressed was the definition of ""moderate,"" which clearly depends on where you sit:
If you sit in a burqa, there is no such thing as a ""moderate"" Taliban.
Petraeus might find it easy now to sidestep the question of what will happen to Afghanistan's women once the ""moderate""
Taliban come back, but it's likely to haunt him for a long time. Without the security of women there is no security -- and
until we've done more to protect it, we have a moral and practical obligation to stay in Afghanistan.
In 2001, George W. Bush's administration interpreted the first post-invasion photos of Afghan girls heading to school and
of Afghan women unveiling their faces as tangible evidence that conditions were improving in that benighted land. A few
months after the invasion, in his 2002 State of the Union address, Bush announced, ""The last time we met in this
chamber, the mothers and daughters of Afghanistan were captives in their own homes, forbidden from working or going to
school. Today women are free and are part of Afghanistan's new government.""
The Americans strong-armed a handful of women into the loya jirga that then drafted the Afghan Constitution. They
strong-armed a quota for women in the Afghan national legislature -- something that even American women are not
treated to. U.S. troops built schools for girls and pushed for women to be included in the local shuras, and USAID ripped a
page from Greg Mortenson's Three Cups of Tea and facilitated new training and educational opportunities for women.
But the current administration, despite its female secretary of State and its new Office of Global Women's Issues, appears
to be ditching the women of Afghanistan like a blind date gone bad. You have to go back 10 months to find any sustained
rhetoric from President Barack Obama about the importance of assuring the security of women in Afghanistan. Since
then, and especially since last year's Afghan election, those fine words from a sitting president have all but disappeared.
Many of the fine actions are gone, too. Push local shuras into including women in 2002? Yes. Push local shuras into
including women in 2010? Forget it.
It's not difficult to understand why. Afghanistan is in crisis. The cynical policies that characterized the early to mid-stages
of the occupation have come home to roost. President Hamid Karzai and his rogue's gallery of kleptocrats, human rights
abusers, and drug lords are hanging onto power even as Karzai declares open season on the United Nations by accusing
senior bureaucrats of organizing the widespread voter fraud that consolidated his own hold on power.
In the meantime, women have taken a back seat to realpolitik and the exigencies of a coalition exit strategy. But their
suffering is real, as Afghanistan's poverty and chaos affect women possibly most of all. Matemal mortality in Afghanistan
still makes the world's top three list, nine years after the U.S. invasion, resulting in a life expectancy for women of 46. In
the countryside, Taliban zealots spray acid into girls' faces for going to school -- and only 27 percent of them do so in the
first place. According to a recent survey by the U.N. Development Fund for Women, 87 percent of Afghan women report
being beaten on a regular basis.
In July of last year, the U.N. Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) issued a report that represents the most stinging
official condemnation of the Karzai administration's abysmal track record on women to date. The report concluded, ""The
current reality is that ... women are denied their most fundamental human rights and risk further violence in the course of
seeking justice for crimes perpetrated against them."" Last year Karzai pardoned well-connected political thugs who --
before witnesses -- gang-raped a woman with a bayonet. Her husband, who had battled for redress, was assassinated
soon thereafter. Women who dare to speak out against the widespread trampling of their rights face almost certain death
while their murderers face 100 percent impunity.
For the warlords and mujahideen that make up the upper echelons of the Karzai government, the issue of gender equality
was always an unwanted appendage to U.S. involvement -- but one that could easily be dispensed with through the
deployment of flowery speeches and the token appointment of a lone female minister to the Ministry of Women's Affairs.
Indeed, just before his recent ""election,"" Karzai felt secure enough to sign into law a series of repressive measures
designed to repeal what minimal gains women have made since the Taliban ouster.
Although eventually forced to back down over legislation that allows Shiite husbands to rape their wives, Karzai
successfully signed into law other legislation that denies or severely limits women's rights to inherit, divorce, or have
guardianship of their own children. The Shiite Personal Status Law also legalizes forced marriage and the rape of minors.
It allows men to exert almost total control over female relatives and offers them the power to prohibit women's access to
work, education, and health care by denying them the right to leave their homes except for ""legitimate"" purposes. Even
Karzai's own wife -- a doctor whose skills are desperately needed -- is strictly sequestered. And if this sounds bad, just
wait until the Americans leave.
This is not just about women. Gender inequality not only affects girls and women, but boys and men. In Afghanistan,
because women are rarely able to leave the house, very young boys are often forced to carry an unwarranted amount of
financial responsibility, something that limits their prospects as well.
Nor is it even just about Afghanistan. As Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said in March, ""The subjugation of women is a
threat to the national security of the United States."" On a geopolitical level, Valerie's research has found that states with
higher levels of violence against women are also less peaceful internationally. Indeed, violence against women is a better
predictor of bellicosity than level of democracy, level of wealth, or presence of Islamic civilization. In a 2010 study, Valerie,
along with Brad Thayer, also found high levels of gender inequality to be a strong aggravating factor in the development of
Islamic suicide terrorism.
So, given the desperate need of Afghanistan's women and the serious consequences worldwide, why aren't we doing
more to help? One reason is the fallacious notion, common among coalition members, that Afghan ""culture"" does not
allow for gender equality and that forcing the issue will undermine Western interests. Pat heard this openly from one
coalition representative, who prefers to remain anonymous: 'There is no point in pushing gender equality. It will only
alienate them [Afghans]."" Of course, ""them"" here refers only to men.
But decision-makers forget that culture is not fixed, but is highly mutable and dynamic. More than 30 years ago, Afghan
women were attending universities, teaching, working as doctors, nurses, and professors. Far from being a black hole of
gender apartheid, Afghanistan, though impoverished, was more progressive than many of its Muslim neighbors.
Furthermore, many young Afghans are open to new ways of doing things. In 2009, hundreds of Afghan men and women
bravely stood together in Kabul to protest Karzai's support for a new and oppressive Shiite family law. If Americans
assume that all Afghan men are Neanderthals incapable of sympathizing with the plight of their sisters, they are wrong.
Another, more unmentionable reason may be the chauvinism that permeates Western military culture. U.S. military life,
despite increasing female recruitment and even ""female engagement teams,"" remains a bastion of masculinity, with little
sensitivity toward questions of female rights. For military leadership and recruits alike, immured as they are in an almost
exclusively male world, the complete absence of women from Afghanistan's streets and villages elicited no comment from
the Marines who surrounded Pat, though she as a woman noticed it immediately.
And the ready availability of pornography on U.S. bases, coupled with seamier depictions of life in the West, not only
damages prospects for gender equality but by extension, Western interests. As one young, well-educated 24-year-old
Afghan male pointed out, ""Your culture has no respect for women at all. Look at your pornography and the way you exploit
women in ways that we can't even imagine. Do you call that progress?"" Added another Afghan USAID programmer
working in Gardez, a man in his 50s who is the father of three girls, ""It would be better for the coalition if they could figure
out a way to limit this kind of material.""
We can do better -- much better.
The Obama administration must instill in all military personnel and senior diplomats the necessity of fully protecting
women's rights. Key to that is educating them about how gender equality furthers Western interests and security.
The military should spend less time courting ""moderate"" Taliban and more time showing Afghan community leaders how
gender equality -- including female access to family planning methods -- will result in healthier families, lower maternal
and child death rates, poverty alleviation, and greater self-determination. Gender should be included as a component in all
governance training and should be placed front and center in the upcoming ""peace jirga"" that will include the Taliban.
Indeed, let half of the negotiating team representing the government and the coalition be female: yes, a full 50 percent.
Women must also be represented in the government. As Melanne Verveer, U.S. ambassador at large for global women's
issues, noted last summer, speaking of female politicians in Afghanistan, ""There is only one minister in the cabinet, and
she is powerless. There is a low percentage of women in the civil service. There is only one female governor, in
Bamiyan."" Obama must insist on important changes for women before we leave and make subsequent aid contingent
upon maintenance of a strong presence for women in the Afghan government.
Better yet, the coalition needs to support ""regime change"" through the building of democratic institutions that will groom a
moderate, educated middle class of young women and men to eventually take over. Over two-thirds of the Afghan
population is under the age of 25, which is either a real opportunity for social change -- if they are educated and given a
chance to shape their society in a progressive way -- or a major obstacle, if they find themselves without jobs, unable to
marry, and burdened with retrograde attitudes of what it means to be male and female.
We must hold Afghanistan responsible for its treaty obligations under the U.N. Convention on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAVV) and U.N. Security Council Resolution 1325 on women, peace, and
security. Afghanistan signed CEDAW without reservations (the United States interestingly, has not), and that means that it
has committed to passing whatever legislation is necessary to implement the wide-ranging principles of gender equality
enshrined in that treaty. This includes taking measures to ensure that women enjoy the same basic human rights and
fundamental freedoms as men, having in place legal and judicial procedures to protect the rights of women, taking
measures to eliminate sexist discrimination, and lastly, submitting national reports every four years to a U.N. advisory
group of international experts, the CEDAW Committee, to ensure transparency on what measures the country has taken
to implement the treaty's provisions.
Unanimously adopted in 2000, UNSC 1325 marked the first time the Security Council recognized the disproportionate and
unique impact of armed conflict on women and stressed the importance of their equal and full participation as active
agents in peace and security.
Needless to say, women do not currently enjoy the same fundamental freedoms as men, and indeed, with the passing of
the Shiite family law, many are worse off than they were before.
To change this, the coalition needs to stay in Afghanistan. Withdrawing at this critical juncture would doom Afghanistan
and the entire region to instability and effectively consign one half of the population to premature death and an existence
not fit for animals.
We are creating a shameful American tradition of leaving women no better off (Afghanistan) -- or even much worse off
(Iraq) -- than before U.S. troops intervened. On the basis of America's track record, women around the world should have
no faith that U.S. soldiers will improve their security. Despite Clinton's remarks on the link between gender equality and
security, on the ground Americans act as if women's well-being, in the end, is not more than peripherally related to the
issue of peace. As we have seen, this view could not be more wrong. Verveer's benchmarks concerning Afghanistan are
the right ones: ""Progress in Afghanistan must be measured not just in military terms, but also in terms of social, political,
and economic participation of women in rebuilding Afghanistan and in the safeguarding of their human rights.""
American women are right to ask why we are sending their sons and daughters to fight and die so that Afghan women can
continue to be treated like an inferior subspecies of humanity. When you break faith with Afghan women, you break faith
with American women. You also break faith with your reasons for being there in the first place.
Save bio when you subscribe to FP.
Majid Saeedi/Getty Image"
5538,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, May 12, 2010 1:22 PM
FW: Haiti MDTF Contribution of $55M!
fyi"
5539,Yes lona has it on list
5540,"FedEx to my house
RELEASE IN PART B6"
5541,Compliment for you. B6
5542,"FedEx to my house
RELEASE IN PART B6"
5543,"Under-Skin Defibrillators Seen Closer to Reality
By BARRY MEIER
The likelihood that patients in the United States may some day receive heart defibrillators that can operate without
electrical wires connected to their hearts has moved a step closer, according to a study published Wednesday.
The development of the new type of defibrillator has been long pursued by a researcher, Dr. Gust H. Bardy, at the Seattle
Institute for Cardiac Research in Seattle. And in the study in The New England Journal of Medicine, Dr. Bardy and other
researchers reported that initial trials of such a device in patients were successful.
Defibrillators fire an electrical jolt to interrupt a potentially fatal heart rhythm and restore normal beating. For a unit to
function, a surgeon must thread an electrical sensing wire through a blood vessel into a patient's heart. The wires pose
risks because they can, on rare occasion, puncture the heart during implantation or fracture while in place.
The new version delivers the electrical jolt by means of a sensor implanted under the skin near the chest bone. A power
unit is placed under the skin on the side of the chest.
The new device is already for sale in some European countries, but Dr. Bardy and others cautioned that full-scale, long-
term trials were still needed to prove the implant's worth to the Food and Drug Administration. Even if successful, the
unit could not be used by all patients who needed a defibrillator, but several researchers said they were excited by the new
study nonetheless.
Dr. Douglas P. Zipes, a professor at the Indiana University School of Medicine in Indianapolis, said the new device could
someday displace existing models used in many patients Every month, about 10,000 patients in this country get a
defibrillator, either for the first time or as replacements for devices whose batteries have worn out.
In recent years, the safety of defibrillator wires has come in particular focus because a model made by Medtronic has been
prone to fracturing. Hundreds of patients who received the model have had to undergo new operations to replace it. Also,
scar tissue often builds up around intravenous wires, a process that can make removing and replacing them difficult or
dangerous.
Dr. Bardy said in a telephone interview that the deaths of several patients many years ago because of wire-related injuries
were a factor in his interest in developing the new device.
""You are looking at a therapy that can avert, we hope, complications and be as effective,"" he said.
In the study published Wednesday, Dr. Bardy and others reported that the new device had undergone several successful
initial trials, including one in which it was used for a year in about 60 patients.
The device is being developed by Cameron Health, a small company in San Clemente, Calif., that was co-founded by Dr.
Bardy. Since the cardiologist began work on the project about a decade ago, the defibrillator he helped design has gone
through several iterations.
The device will not be suitable for a significant number of heart patients, particularly those who require units that also
include a pacemaker, which regulates a heart that is beating too fast or too slowly.
But Dr. Bardy estimated that the device could work in about 25 percent of patients who now get a defibrillator. These are
largely patients at risk, because of genetic factors or certain types of heart diseases, for a type of erratic cardiac rhythm
that can cause sudden death. Dr. Bardy said the cost of the new device is about the same as a standard defibrillator.
However, he said it could help reduce health care costs, because implanting it is much simpler.
Before the device can be sold here, Cameron Health will have to submit more extensive human trial data to theF.D.A.. Dr.
Bardy said a larger study of the device has just begun in this country and overseas and that it will most likely take a year or
more to assemble data from it for the agency's review."
5544,"August 8, 2010
Gary Sick
America and Iran: Strikes, Sanctions and Scapegoats
For the pundits, there are only two questions about U.S.-Iran relations that are of any importance: (1) Will Israel
and/or the United States attack Iran? and (2) will the new sanctions have enough bite to persuade Iran to change
its nuclear policy? Despite all the printers ink spilled on these two issues, the answers are an easy no and no.
Neither the United States nor Israel will take the military option off the table, thereby giving the pundits (and the
crowd that is dying to repeat Iraq) latitude to keep the distant prospect of military action on the front pages,
where it has been for years. As a lede, it sells columns and newspapers, so it will not go away. But as analysis it
is either blinded by the momentary hype or else is simple wish fulfillment.
Uber-neocon John Bolton had it right. If any such attack were to occur, it would have been at the end of the Bush
administration when there was nothing left to lose. Bolton thought it was so inevitable that he predicted it
unequivocally in a Wall Street Journal column in 2008. Dick Cheney apparently agreed, judging from his
subsequent statements of regret. So it is fair to say that George W. Bush, after looking the potential
consequences, resisted the advice of his neocon advisers, his previously dominant vice president, and the
reported direct request from the government of Israel — and rejected a strike. What is the likelihood that Barack
Obama, with the same catastrophic scenario before him, will approve? Forget it.
Sanctions do not persuade dictatorial regimes to abandon projects that they think are central to their security
and survival or even their self-image. Just look at Saddam Hussein. The international sanctions imposed on Iraq
in the 1980s make the current Iran sanctions appear anemic in comparison. Every item that went in and out of
Iraq was subject to approval by a UN committee dominated by a vindictive United States. Yet, although Iraq had
abandoned its nuclear weapons program years earlier, Saddam could not bring himself to let his own people and
his enemies know that. Instead he was prepared to gamble that the United States would not attack him.
One of the reasons for this bad bet was that he and his cronies were doing so well under the sanctions that there
was no immediate necessity to come clean. They, after all, controlled the smuggling routes. And their henchmen
managed the thriving and enormously lucrative black market. As for concern with their own people, a rotund
Tariq Aziz, sitting with a fine Scotch and a Cuban cigar, informed a worried UN representative that it would be
good for the Iraqi people to lose some weight. An Iraqi friend of mine told me at the time that the sanctions had
made criminals of the entire Iraqi middle class, which had to resort to illegal behavior in order to survive. The
biggest – and most successful – of this new criminal class was the privileged group immediately around Saddam
Hussein.
Which brings us to Iran. The sanctions are more effective than many anticipated. They have built a web of
financial restrictions and limitations around the already weak Iranian economy that is certain to cause significant
problems for the leadership. Iran's critical energy sector is particularly vulnerable. It is in a pincer. Because of
cheap energy prices inside the country, artificially propped up by massive subsidies, energy demand is soaring.
This siphons off a lot of Iran's oil production, which would otherwise be sold on the world market for hard
currency.
At the same time, because Iran's oil fields are old and complex, they require modern technology to maintain
production. That technology – and the capital investment that can only be provided by the major international oil
companies – has been absent for many years. It was driven away partly by the sanctions, ironically assisted by
Iran's own short-sighted negotiating tactics that offered only the most meager profit margins to outside
investors. As a result, Iran's oil production is in decline at the same time that more and more of it is being soaked
up by domestic consumption. In a period of relatively low oil prices, this means that Iran's hard currency
earnings are drying up at an alarming rate.
This unenviable economic situation is compounded by what has to be described as perhaps the least competent
economic management team of any major country in the world. Ayatollah Khamene'i, the Supreme Leader,
seems totally preoccupied with bolstering his own shaky political legitimacy by pandering to the Revolutionary
Guards who surround and protect him. The result is corruption on a scale beyond anything the shah's regime
could have imagined.
President Ahmadinejad, also a creature of the Revolutionary Guards, is free to indulge his taste for outlandish
and irresponsible rhetoric. His words keep the international and domestic spotlight glued to him; but the effect
drives away prospective investors and facilitates the U.S. drive to enlist international support for sanctions
against Iran. An American Jewish leader once joked with me that he suspected Ahmadinejad was a Mossad
agent: no one, he observed, had been more helpful in promoting donations to Israel and Israeli causes. At the
same time, under his leadership Iran has inflation and unemployment that are both in double digits.
But to be fair, Ahmadinejad is the first politician in modern Iranian history willing to address the ""third rail"" of
Iranian politics — the immensely costly subsidies on food and energy. His initial efforts to reduce the amount of
subsidized gasoline that Iranians could use met with outbursts of indignation, including torching filling stations.
But these rules now seem to be grudgingly accepted and have eased slightly Iran's energy dilemma. He is now
addressing the low tax rates assessed against merchants. This has also resulted in outrage, including closing
the bazaars in Iran and other major cities. But his campaign seems to be making progress.
These are needed reforms that would be recommended by any responsible economic overseer, including the
International Monetary Fund. Ahmadinejad attempts to balance his daring assaults on the entrenched economic
interests by his belligerent rhetoric, always casting himself as the champion of the little guy. In that he resembles
his populist predecessors, from Juan Peron to Huey Long to Hugo Chavez. Ahmadinejad takes on America and
Israel the way Governor Long took on Standard Oil. But like other populists, Ahmadinejad is the prisoner of his
own eccentric view of the world and his loyalty to lieutenants who may or may not be worthy of his faith in them.
The key question about Iran today is not whether it will be attacked or collapse under sanctions. It is whether Iran
is capable under its present leadership to take a sober decision about how to deal with the outside world. The
Revolutionary Guards have established a dominant position in Iran's military, its economy, and its politics. Iran
increasingly comes to resemble the corporatist states of southern and eastern Europe in the 1920s and '30s that
we call fascist. Iran is conducting an interior battle with its own demons, from the millenarians on the far right
who choose to believe that Khamene'i is the personal representative of God on earth, to the pragmatic
conservatives who simply want a more responsible leadership, to the reformists of the Green movement whose
objective is to put the ""republic"" back into the Islamic Republic by giving the people a greater voice.
This is a yeasty and unpredictable mix. No one knows what is going to happen next.
And this is the reality that the Obama administration must deal with. The danger is not that the administration will
back the wrong horse in Iran. The real danger is that the Obama administration will be so preoccupied with
domestic American politics and its constant demand to look tough when dealing with Iran that it will
inadvertently rescue this cruel but hapless regime from its own ineptitude by providing a convenient scapegoat
for everything that goes wrong in Iran."
5545,"I remember what I was going to say earlier — you might check in with Steve Bosworth on the Spanta thing. Fletcher
might work, or else he might have thoughts about other policy schools."
5547,"Yes, I will work on a visit if you don't have a call set up.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State B6"
5548,"Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.gov>
Monday, August 9, 2010 9:31 AM
H
Re: Sad news re
Ok"
5549,Had not heard but Iona taking care of it.
5550,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, May 13, 2010 2:33 PM
Abedin, Huma
For Karzai walk
SRAP pulled together the following:,
We recommend you raise the following issues with President Karzai in your private session."
5551,"Attended Ambassador Capricia's event last night at the Art Institute. It was a magical evening.
We sat with the ambassador
from Guyana and the ambassador from the Philippines. Lovely people. A staff from the Dept of
State sat with us: Gladys hope she would report that we
behaved. A lovely idea this field trip for the big guys/gals.
ambassadors pretending that they were more excited about going to the
Merc. Rick's group doing a great job. Now if only the weather would cooperate. We had 2 1/2 inches
of rain this morning."
5552,"Here is what PJ said on the subject:
The Secretary this morning spoke with Turkish Foreign Minister Davutoglu regarding Iran. During the call, the Secretary
stressed that, in our view, Iran's recent diplomacy was an attempt to stop Security Council action without actually taking
steps to address international concerns about its nuclear program. There's nothing new and nothing encouraging in
Iran's recent statements. It has failed to demonstrate good faith and build confidence with the international
community, which was the original intent of the Tehran research reactor proposal. It has yet to formally respond to the
IAEA. She stressed that the burden is with Iran and its lack of seriousness about engagement requires us to intensify
efforts to apply greater pressure on Iran. That was the primary purpose of the conversation. They briefly touched on
other subjects, including Middle East peace and the relationship between Turkey and Azerbaijan."
5553,"Russo, Robert V <RussoRV@state.gov>
Monday, August 9, 2010 3:48 PM
betsyebelin
H; Huma Abedin; Jiloty, Lauren C
RE:
FYI - I am placing the note in the mail to you this afternoon via FedEx priority overnight. You should receive it tomorrow
morning, before 10am. Here is the tracking number: Let me know if you have any questions."
5554,"He is going to Ft Campbell tomorrow and then heading back with the Afghan delegation straight from there. So it does
not look like there will be an opportunity to see him with Jack tomorrow."
5555,"Dennis finally completed his call with Molho, after two hours of secure phone technology travails. He gave me a brief
readout. I can provide, or you might just call him."
5557,"One thing I forgot to mention - Bill B and Mike Posner recommend that you release the below statement. Apparently
Hamidi's execution is imminent. With your approval we'll put out.
DRAFT STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
Urging Iran to Respect the Fundamental Freedoms of its Citizens
The United States is deeply concerned that Iran continues to deny its citizens their civil rights, as well as to intimidate
and detain those Iranians who seek to hold their government accountable and who stand up for the rights of their
fellow citizens. We remain troubled by the case of Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani, who garnered international attention
for her verdict of death by stoning. While the Iranian government later stated she would not face execution by stoning,
her fate has been left unclear. We are also troubled by reports that Ebrahim Hamidi, an 18-year old charged with
homosexuality, faces imminent execution despite the fact that he is currently without legal representation. Neither of
their cases have proceeded with the transparency or due process enshrined in Iran's own constitution and their lawyer,
Mohammad Mostafaei, felt that he had no other choice than to flee Iran after he had been questioned by authorities
and his family members had been detained.
We are also concerned about the fate of Iranians who are in danger of imminent execution for exercising their right to
free expression after the June 2009 elections, including Jafar Kazemi, Mohammad Haj Aghaei, and Javad Lan.
The United States urges the Iranian government to halt these executions in accordance with its international obligations
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and calls for the immediate release of all political prisoners
and imprisoned human rights defenders. The United States will continue to stand with people all around the world who
seek to exercise their universal rights and to speak out in defense of human liberties."
5558,"I just checked and we don't. I will get updated contact information for them today. All we have is a home phone
number of and a mailing address: I'll send you
the updates when I get it."
5559,Got it:
5561,FYI
5562,"B6'
RELEASE IN PART B6"
5565,Makes sense. We'll get it done. Presume you want Jack on.
5566,Got it. We'll set it up.
5568,"Yes that is the cell number her office gave us- I've verified it so I assume it's for one of her aides. I left a couple of
messages there but didn't hear back. I will try her office again to see if we can secure any better number. I also know
huma emailed with elena earlier in the week."
5569,"Ebeling, Betsy <
Wednesday, August 11, 2010 9:28 AM
H; Huma Abedin; abedinh@state.gov; RussoRV@state.gov
Something has gone haywire with my blackberry (oh no!!) so I must apologize if you have already
heard from me and if not, apologize again for the delay in getting back to you with my update. Rob,
the letter arrived on time and and I delivered it to the family at the wake last
night, and the kids were so touched by the letter and the effort made by all of you. said
through tears: that wonderful woman!! And that you are, my Dear Gert. Your words meant so
much to the kids and They were showing it, very carefully, to s family, especially her
father. This was a hard one. Love you, B"
5570,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 11, 2010 9:51 AM
Ebeling, Betsy; H; Huma Abedin; Russo, Robert V
RE:
He wrote a very beautiful email for hrc which we just printed for her"
5571,Good so far...
5572,Senate will go into session tomorrow to pass border security bill by uc.
5573,"Of course!
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State B6"
5574,"May 13, 2010
For: Hillary"
5575,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Friday, May 14, 2010 8:22 AM
Fw: (AP) Diplomats: Iran expands enrichment facility"
5576,"B6
And left this return phone number:
###"
5577,"Thanks for the chat yesterday, Hillary. With Martin's and Bruce Jones's help, I'm working on
that one. Will get back to you.
On a very different matter—and that's why I'm cc'ing Cheryl and Jake—at some point when
it's appropriate and convenient, I'd welcome a chance to give you—either directly or indirectly
via C and/or J—a strongly held (and widely shared) view about the issue of UN leadership and
the timetable therefore. Zero rush.
Hope it's a genuine weekend for you (whatever that means, grading on curve).
Strobe
Strobe Talbott
President, The Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202.797.6200"
5578,"Will follow up on ""memo"" and Silicon Valley. Have a good weekend. Bill"
5579,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Sunday, May 16, 2010 11:15 AM
Oscar Flores
Fw: Latest Version of Draft S. Testimony for START Hearing
Clinton Testimony on the New START Treaty -- 5.16.10 DRAFT.docx
Oscar can u pis print for hrc to review?"
5581,Done
5582,"I think you have the original/only copy... I may have scanned a copy before I gave it to you but not positive; III check my
computer files and let you know."
5583,They got cloture (60 votes exactly). Will vote on final passage today.
5584,"http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/16/opinion/16iht-edcohen.html?2=1&emc=eta18,pagewanted=print
July 15, 2010
Inners arid Losers
Ey ROGER COHEN
NEW YORK — The Clintons threw a big Washington bash on June 30 for Hillary Clinton's longtime aide, Hume Abedin,
and what struck one of the many guests was the absence of anyone from President Obama's tight White House inner
circle.
Congressional heavyweights thronged the garden of the Clinton spread on Embassy Row, including House Speaker
Nancy Pelosi. The city's big powerbrokers and various State Department honchos were there for a party marking Abedin's
marriage to Congressman Anthony Weiner of New York. But White House insiders stayed away.
Well, as Bill Clinton told CNN recently, ""I did everything I could to defeat President Obama and I wanted Hillary to win"" —
old wounds do not heal overnight. Indeed, they may not heal at all. When my informant said something about the old
grievances not going away, the response from the hosts went something like this:
No, they don't and they never will. But, we're public servants and suckers for punishment, so we soldier on.
Speaking of soldiering on, Mrs. Clinton left for Europe the next day and while Americans celebrated July 4, she was in
Armenia trying to sort out the Nagorno-Karabakh dispute and.— equally thankless task — mediate between Armenia and
Turkey on their disagreement over what happened in 1915.
You've got to salute Hillary. She's got guts to go with that razor-sharp mind. It's a heck of a job being secretary of state
when the White House puts a tight collar around the big issues — Afghanistan, Iran, Israel-Palestine and Iraq — and
you're left with Nagorno-Karabakh, disputed Ottoman crimes of World War I and, if you're lucky, U.S. bases on Okinawa.
The situation might be slightly less troubling if the boys in the White House — and they are overwhelmingly boys — were
foreign-policy heavyweights. They're not. Indeed, I'm told Henry Kissinger refers to them as ""the kids.""
Chief among them, according to my colleague Helene Cooper, is Denis McDonough, the National Security Council's chief
of staff. Earlier this month, Cooper wrote: ""Forget Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton or Defense Secretary Robert
M. Gates. When it comes to national security, Mr. Obama's inner circle is so tight it largely consists of Mr. McDonough, a
40-year-old from Minnesota who is unknown to most Americans.""
I do know McDonough and I've spent a fair amount of time in Minnesota. He has many of the state's qualities: positive,
brisk, can-do, affable and efficient.
But am I reassured when! read that Obama's national-security inner circle is comprised of him? Nope. He was a great
guy to control the foreign-policy side of a campaign — as he did to perfection for Obama — but he's not a great guy to
think big about the world.
Thinking big and bold is required right now. The clock is ticking on momentous presidential decisions. Among them are an
Afghan extrication that will salvage a minimum of core U.S. security interests — which will require a bruising negotiation
with the Taliban — and what to do about Iran when it becomes apparent by the end of this year that the latest sanctions
have changed nothing. Obama's apparent carte blanche to Israel this month on Iran was disturbing.
Then there's Israel-Palestine, where Obama can't decide whether the cost of being an honest broker pressure on both
sides — is worth the domestic heat he takes for being critical of Israel, with the result that he's zigzagging to little effect.
After firing Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal, Obama said he would tolerate debate but not division. My sense is his foreign-
policy house is divided — and the weaker for it. Gen. James Jones, his national security adviser, speaks fine French —
the French love that — but he's left most people unconvinced. Tom Donilon, Jones' deputy, dances around the vacuum
as best he can. Like McDonough, David Axelrod and Rehm Emanuel were brilliant campaign strategists, but should they
be foreign-policy strategists?
In Clinton, Obama has a Baker-class secretary of state. For how much longer is he going to delegate her to Nagorno-
Karabakh? The State Department, a repository of Other underused talent, cannot be the White House annex for non-
critical affairs.
Back in the 1860s, James Gordon Bennett, then the editor of the New York Herald, a forebear of the International Herald
Tribune, gave these instructions to an intrepid foreign correspondent named Henry Morton Stanley:
""Draw a thousand pounds now; and when you have gone through that, draw another thousand, and when that is spent,
draw another thousand, and when you have finished that, draw another thousand, and so on; but, FIND LIVINGSTONE.""
He was referring to the lost African explorer, David Livingstone, whom Stanley eventually tracked down on Lake
Tanganyika, uttering the immortal words: ""Doctor Livingstone, I presume?""
That sort of journalism's gone out of fashion. So we can all thank Rolling Stone for opening its pocketbook and telling
Michael Hastings to do whatever it took to find General McChrystal. In his brilliant piece, Hastings did that. He also found
something else: an Afghan policy as fragmented as the team Obama running it.
McChrystal's gone, but not the dysfunction. A blow-up, I presume? Watch this space."
5585,"Brown, Collins and Snowe voted yes. Feingold voted no."
5586,FYI
5587,"FYI — the Colombians are starting to brief the press on evidence of FARC activity in Venezuela. We'll monitor over night
and tomorrow."
5588,"RELEASE IN
PART B5"
5589,"Mitchell meets with BN tomorrow in Jerusalem, Abbas Saturday, BN again Saturday, then to Cairo for Mubarak on
Sunday.
They will take the call down."
5590,"8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:30 am MEETING w/SENATOR JOHNNY ISAKSON
10:00 am Secretary's Outer Office
10:15 am MEETING ON CUBA ISSUES
11:00 am Secretary's Conference Room
11:00 am OFFICE TIME
11:20 am Secretary's Office
11:20 am PHOTOS w/YOUTH AWARDS HONOREES
11:30 am Treaty Room, r Floor
11:45 am LUNCHEON FOR THE CEOS OF THE BUSINESS ROUNDTABLE
12:30 pm James Monroe Room, 8' Floor
12:30 pm DEPART State Department
En route Washington National Airport
12:50 pm ARRIVE Washington National Airport
1:00 pm DEPART Washington National Airport via US Airways Shuttle #2172
En route New York, NY
2:25 pm ARRIVE New York, New York-LaGuardia Airport
2:35 pm DEPART New York-LaGuardia Airport
En route Private Residence
3:00 pm PHONE INTERVIEW w/MARK LANDLER, NEW YORK TIMES
3:15 pm En route Private Residence
3:25 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
FYI:
12:00 pm YOUTH AWARDS CEREMONY
2:00 pm Benjamin Franklin Room, 8' Floor
###"
5591,"B6
On another note, I hope we might have time to chat briefly before I leave State — maybe when you're in the office in
mid-August. Two issues I want to discuss: 1) sports diplomacy 2) a series of speeches I'd love you to give on young
people (the public diplomacy speech could be one piece).
I'd also be happy to share some observations about this place if that might be useful to you.
Safe travels.
Lissa Muscatine
Senior Advisor and Director of Speechwriting
Department of State
202-647-9841"
5592,"Wants to talk with you re Afghanistan and his displeasure with Holbrooke. They got into a verbal sparring match at the
hearing. I thought holbrooke was polite and responsive."
5593,FYI
5595,"And pasted below is the exchange between Corker and Holbrooke:
CORKER:
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
I want to thank the ambassador for coming. I know he has a wealth of knowledge and certainly served our country for
many years.
A number of us wrote a letter to you asking for this hearing, and my guess is you might have had hearings any way.
But the reason we wrote the letter -- bipartisan letter -- was to provide Congress and the American people with a
definition of the end state for our civilian operations in Afghanistan, clear objectives for the civilian mission, and a
detailed plan for achieving those objectives, and the very specific, measurable metrics being used to measure progress
towards achieving those objectives.
I have to say, I've been here for an hour and 10 minutes. I have heard nothing -- nothing -- about that. And while I
respect the ambassador, I've heard a lot of process. I've heard a lot about meetings. I have no earthly idea -- no earthly
idea what our objectives are on the civilian front.
And I don't know if you have time to begin doing that right now, but this has so far been an incredible waste of time,
from the standpoint of -- of hearing, though.
And I have tremendous respect for you, but maybe we have the wrong witness. I hope we'll have maybe Secretary
Clinton and Eikenberry, maybe Crocker. I know he's supposed to come.
But could you answer the question that was the purpose of these hearings in the first place?
HOLBROOKE:
I'm sorry. You don't feel that I've told you what our civilian programs are?
CORKER:
You've told me a lot of process. I'd like to know a definition of what our end state is for civilian operations, the very
question we asked when we set this hearing up, is in Afghanistan, clear objectives for the -- for the -- detailed plan for
achieving those. I'd like to hear you talk about that.
I mean, I'm glad we have a lot of interagency folks here, but I'm not hearing anything that talks about where we're
going.
I'd also like to know how the withdrawal date that's been set affects that and how it affects those we're working with
in the country.
HOLBROOKE:
First of all, Senator Corker, I believe I have discussed our civilian programs in very considerable detail within the
constraints of time, but we did prepare a report for this committee earlier this year, which was entered into the record
and which I will be happy to enter into the record again, if you wish. And you can go through every one of the programs.
The reason I brought my colleagues with me was to show that this was a whole-of-government, an unprecedented
effort.
Now, on the specifics, since you want specifics, Afghanistan is an agricultural country. It exported agricultural products
until 1978 and the Soviet invasion. We are trying to rebuild it. This was not being done for the first seven years of this
war.
We have -- your -- your committee has given us a great deal of money for agriculture. And we are spending it wisely in
a joint AID- USDA effort, which Senator Lugar has particularly been involved in, food, seeds, cash-for-work programs,
encouraging alternatives to opium production.
HOLBROOKE:
Secondly, rule of law. We are spending -- we are spending the money you have authorized for us to create a justice
system which can cut into the Taliban's propaganda about corruption and lack of a justice system.
Third, counter-narcotics. We have ended poppy eradication, a radical change, because all we were doing by
eradicating poppy seeds, poppy crops, was driving farmers, poor farmers, into the hands of the Taliban.
Fourth, a major program of subnational governance, where we are putting aid directly to the district level.
Fifth, a major effort in specific areas, some of which were alluded to earlier, such as electricity for Kandahar. Senator
Kerry asked earlier about Kandahar. One of the major issues here is to bring electricity to the people as a benefit of the
international presence.
The whole range of activities we have is designed to support the country and to support General Petraeus' counter-
insurgency effort. He and I -- I was his counterpart until two weeks ago when he moved to Kabul. We have worked
intimately in an effort to create a joint civilian-military effort. And I am happy to provide you with every detail you wish
in private briefings on behalf of me and my team.
Point number two in regard to the end state issue you raised. I want to be clear on the difference between end state
and exit strategy.
If we -- this is my personal view, senator -- but if we walk away from Afghanistan, again, as we did 21 years ago, the
consequences will be similarly catastrophic, because of the unique strategic position of Afghanistan and the reaction
that would have in Pakistan, China, India and the country to Afghanistan's west, Iran, as well as the larger region that
includes Russia, Saudi Arabia, India, and even extending to Western Europe, which is concerned about terrorism from
that region, just as much as we are.
So, I hope that when we talk about end state, we talk about a sustainable end state which involves continued
American economic and development assistance, and we continue to fulfill our obligations to train the police and the
military. This will not be cheap. But it will be a fraction of the money that is now being authorized and appropriated for
the military campaign.
When we will be able to transition to that is impossible for me or anyone to say. But it won't be on a single day. It will
be a gradual process. And that is what the review in December and the president's decision-making will focus on.
CORKER:
In our foreign policy, generally speaking -- I know we've had some rough times over the last several years -- it's been
something that we've been able to address in a bipartisan way. And I think that the issues that you're dealing with, that
we're dealing with in Afghanistan are incredibly tough.
I still don't -- I haven't understood what the administration was saying in the beginning. That's not to be critical of
them. I just don't understand. I still don't understand. I've met with you and your staff over at the State Department. It's
just incredibly vague to me.
And I think what we are doing, we have partners, which include the Pakistanis and everybody around, that they don't
know what we're doing. They don't know when we're leaving. They think we're leaving shortly, I think. We've just had
colleagues who have come from there.
We've had a -- we've got a president there that's having to play both sides, because he wants to survive, because he
doesn't know what our intentions are. The Pakistanis don't know what our intentions are, I don't think. And they're
making accommodations on both sides.
So, I just have to tell you, I send letters to parents and spouses. And what I feel because of this lack of clarity is that we
are in Afghanistan, because we're in Afghanistan, and that we don't have the will to be successful. And we don't have
the will to leave, because of some of the things you just outlined.
But I just don't hear any clarity. And again, I want to support the administration. I want to support you, because that's
what we need to do as a country, is let the shores (ph) align (ph), let the partisanship.
But I have to tell you, as a person who wants to do that, I still don't understand. OK? And I have average intelligence,
so I would ask you to, please -- or maybe let's have some witnesses in here that can shed more light or be more specific.
But I don't understand, and I'm very concerned.
And I think we're sending a lot of mixed signals. And I think there's a lot of dissension. Actually, as I listen to you, even
within the administration itself, and that has to end.
And I just ask you, please. You have a lot of experience, help us understand. You haven't done that today. And I would
ask the chairman to please have some witnesses come in and explain to us what the end state is, what we can envision
Afghanistan being whenever this withdrawal does take place, because I still do not understand.
We've changed it. Now it's sort of a degraded country where they have conflict, but it's not out of control. I mean, the
bar continues to change. And I'm just concerned as an individual, and yet I want us to be, if we can, all on the same page
as much as possible. But I think to do that, this has got to be much clearer than has been outlined.
HOLBROOKE:
Senator, I'm sorry that my answers don't fully satisfy you. But I want to be very clear on this, because I understand
your comments and I respect them.
First of all, the core question -- the one you are asked by your constituents, and I'm asked by everybody -- why are we
in Afghanistan? The short, simple answer is 9/11, direct threats to our national security interests, and the fact that while
our enemies against our homeland are on the Pakistani side of the border, this is a single struggle. And we have to
strengthen the Afghan government and let -- and teach it to stand on its own feet over time, so that we can move
forward, while we do other things that fall outside the scope of this hearing, to dismantle, deter and defeat Al Qaida.
Now, if you do not believe that it's a threat to the homeland, then we have an honest difference of opinion. But I think
the Times Square bombing incident shows clearly how dangerous that situation is.
Secondly, on the civilian mission, again, it's in support of a single, civilian-military, counter-insurgency mission. And we
have benchmarks, requested and required by the Congress, and submitted to you. And our overarching goal here is
always the same, to disrupt, dismantle and defeat Al Qaida and prevent its ability to threaten the United States.
And we believe, all of us -- and there is no division on this in the executive branch -- that the situation we face out
there is a direct threat. We believe that before the Times Square situation occurred, and I don't think anything could
have proved it more vividly.
And to achieve this, we have to degrade the Taliban as well, because they are part of the enemy's structure -- a
different part, but an integral part -- that we face.
Now, the Afghan government doesn't yet have the capacity to deal with this on its own. How could they after 30 years
of war? And so, the civilian part of it, the things I've just mentioned to you -- police, government capacity, rule of law,
subnational government, training provincial officials, women's empowerment and a whole series of other major issues --
are part of our civilian programs.
And we're happy to come back up to your office -- we appreciated your visit to us -- and continue this dialogue.
Our civilian strategy is designed from keeping Al Qaida at bay, and it's designed to help Afghan institutions establish
conditions for stable governance. Our plan has these benchmarks, which have been briefed to you and your colleagues,
and we're happy to discuss them in detail at any time."
5596,"He is calling to complain about Ambassador Holbrooke. He feels that Holbrooke is condescending and not forthcoming,
including at this week's hearing. He also has broader concerns about the lack of a clear end state and metrics for our
Afghan policy, but the main reason he wants to talk to you is about Holbrooke.
Holbrooke tried to faithfully answer his questions and frankly Corker was looking for a sound byte and he got one. We
can offer him additional briefings and a readout after your upcoming trip if that would help.
You could use also this opportunity to thank him for sitting down earlier this week on the New START Treaty; to note
that we received and are following up on his July 14 follow-up letter; and that we want to continue working with him to
get him to a place where he can support the treaty."
5597,FYI — I invited her in since Ricardo reports to her and she and Craig have been doing the cuba engagement.
5599,Exactly
5600,Transcript of Malinowski's meeting with Karzai attached.
5602,FYI -- Karl and Zakhilwal have gone to Islamabad to try to close the deal.
5603,"sbwhoeop
Saturday, July 17, 2010 9:55 AM
H: fyi. circulated in Israeli and US Jewish publications. Note Bibi's private reference to
Bill. Sid
http://www.tabletmag.com/scro11/39692/fibi-netanyahu/
Tablet Magazine s a project of Nextbook. Inc,
About Us I Contact I Terms of Service I RSS
A New Read on Jewish Life
Fibi Netanyahu
In 20015 PM boasted of manipulating Oslo accords
By I Jul 15, 2010 4:03 PM
Netanyahu in 2001.
CREDIT: ::nl 1
Meeting with Benjamin Netanyahu last week, President Obama could not have been more effusive. ""I believe Prime
Minister Netanyahu wants peace,"" Obama :3411 ill. ""I believe he is ready to take risks for peace.""
A newly revealed tape of Netanyahu in 2001, being interviewed while he thinks the cameras are off, shows him in a
radically different light. in it, Netanyahu dismisses American foreign policy as easy to maneuver, boasts of having derailed
the Oslo accords with political trickery, and suggests that the only way to deal with the Palestinians is to ""beat them up,
not once but repeatedly, beat them up so it hurts so badly, until it's unbearable"" (all translations are mine).
PI to Haaretz's Gideon Levy, the video should be ""Banned for viewing by children so as not to corrupt them, and
distributed around the country and the world so that everyone will know who leads the government of Israel.""
Netanyahu is speaking to a small group of terror victims in the West Bank settlement of Ofra two years after stepping
down as prime minister in 1999. He appears laid-back. After claiming that the only way to deal with the Palestinian
Authority was a large-scale attack, Netanyahu was asked by one of the participants whether or not the United States
would let such an attack come to fruition.
""I know what America is,"" Netanyahu replied. ""America is'a thing you can move very easily, move it in the right direction.
They won't get in their way."" He then called former president Bill Clinton ""radically pro-Palestinian,"" and went on to belittle
the Oslo peace accords as vulnerable to manipulation. Since the accords state that Israel would be allowed to hang on to
pre-defined military zones in the West Bank, Netanyahu told his hosts that he could torpedo the accords by defining vast
swaths of land as just that.
""They asked me before the election if rd honor [the Oslo accords],"" Netanyahu said. ""I said I would, but ... I'm going to
interpret the accords in such a way that would allow me to put an end to this gallOping forward to the '67 borders. How did
we do it? Nobody said what defined military zones were. Defined military zones aresecurity zones; as far as I'm
concerned, the entire Jordan Valley is a defined military zone. Go argue.""
Smiling, Netanyahu then recalled how he forced former U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher to agree to let Israel
alone determine which parts of the West Bank were to be defined as military zones. ""They didn't want to give me that
letter,"" Netanyahu said, ""so I didn't give them the Hebron agreement [the agreement giving Hebron back to the
Palestinians]. I cut the cabinet meeting short and said, 'I'm not signing.' Only when the letter came, during that meeting, to
me and to Arafat, did I ratify the Hebron agreement. Why is this important? Because from that moment on, I de facto put
an end to the Oslo accords.""
President Obama, and anyone else concerned about Israel's commitment to the peace process, may watch the tape
online here PI.
Related: Tricky Bibi l2) [Haaretz]
Article printed from Tablet Magazine: http://www,tabletmag.com
URL to article: http://wwvv.tabletmag.com/scro11/39692/fibi-netanyahu/
URLs in this post:
[1] said: http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/09/world/middleeast/09mideast.html
[2] According: http://www.haaretz.com/print-edition/opinion/tricky-bibi-1.302053
[3] here: http://news.nana10.co.il/Articie/?Articield=731025&sid=126
Click here to print.
Copyright © 2010 Tablet Magazine. All rights reserved."
5604,Fyi
5605,10.2 is latest figure based on end FY 09-10 data. (Pakistan fiscal year ends jun 30 so just finalized)
5606,Fyi
5607,"I am currently traveling out of the country. If you need immediate assistance, please contact Joanne Laszczych,
(Laszczych1@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
If it is an emergency after business hours, please reach out to our Operations Center to have them reach me.
Thank you
cdm"
5608,"Vail felt that Anne's assessment of the new Pakistani submission was too negative. He believes it is their opening
position - that it is quite sophisticated - and that it represents a real step forward from their initial 56-page list of
demands.
He acknowledges that it is lighter on the things we care about, but notes for example that productive items like the
strategic dialogue get far more space than unproductive items like civ-nuke.
He very much agrees with your concept of annotating the document."
5609,Fyi
5610,FYI. Would like to check in with you on this in am.
5611,"Fyi - see below. i discussed with Larry. This is not about anything specific you've said, it's the PakMil's general rejoinder to
the American message. But it is worth keeping this critique in mind."
5612,"Here is the readout:
Here is Molho's readout of BN's meeting with Mubarak. Pretty consistent with what GM hear
But Hale met with Suleiman last night
YM's Readout:
1.4(B)
1.4(E)
B1
1.4(D) — Declassify on: 08/26/2035"
5613,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Monday, July 19, 2010 2:08 AM
Fw: Letter from and Meeting with Afghan Minister of Labor, Social Affiars, Martyrs and
Disabled
MoLSAMD Letterjpg; MoLSAMD Letter page 2 docjpg"
5614,"Disabled
From Karl"
5615,in the south
5616,"Below are points for the press on the plane. I'll have a hard copy printed:
First major ministerial in Afghanistan since the 1970s. The very fact of it is a big deal.
Context is important. This is not out of the blue, it's not just a random gathering; it's part of a systematic process:
Karzai's inauguration, announcement of the President's strategy, London conference, Peace Jirga, and now the Kabul
conference.
Increasing Afghan leadership and ownership: They are presenting a set of concrete programs on governance, service
delivery, security transition, economic development, and reintegration. These programs are detailed; they are serious;
and they reflect months of work and consultation.
Increasing international alignment: The international community is coordinating with each other - through ISAF, Sedwill,
de Mistura, etc. - and aligning its efforts with the Afghan programs and priorities being set forth at this conference. This
is NOT a pledging conference. It is an opportunity to ensure we are effectively supporting Afghan government
leadership and ownership
Follow-through and accountability: In his inauguration, Karzai laid out a credible vision; in London, the Afghan
government committed to developing and pursuing specific plans in a variety of areas; at Kabul, we'll be heavily focused
on implementation. This is about mutual accountability for the pledges made and the programs set forth.
July 2011: The president's strategy reflects both urgency and resolve: increased resources and intensity in our efforts to
take the fight to the enemy and to build Afghan capacity to effect a conditions-based transition; and a long-term civilian
commitment to support Afghanistan long into the future.
Clear strategy: Reverse the momentum of the Taliban; build the capacity of Afghan security forces; and as Afghans
develop the capability to stabilize their country, we must draw down our combat presence and make a responsible
transition to Afghan leadership.
Clear desired end-state: An Afghan state that is willing and strong enough to ensure that global terrorists never again
have safe haven within its borders; can withstand internal and external threats; and can continue to make long-term
political and economic progress, all with sustainable levels of international support.
Civ-mil cooperation: Unfortunate to lose General McChrystal, but maintained continuity with General Petraeus and we
have only intensified our civ-mil engagement both in Kabul and Washington.
Reconciliation: Stress that it is Afghan-led. Note red-lines."
5618,"The writer is someone who has worked with Afghan women in developing small businesses in Afghanistan and is doing a
book about the experience.
She went back to Afghanistan for the conference that women had over the weekend and wrote the article that follows
for today's Daily Beast.
Soraya mentioned here is one of our Women of Courage. Gayle (the writer) told me in a separate email that De Mistura
was very sympathetic and said they should be consulted, that the current documents are working documents and he
pledged that the women would be more inovled in the follow up. He also told them that he was very impressed that
they had organized themselves in this 2-day conference to be able to play a more effective role. Zakhilwal was gracious,
but said they were adequately consulted. So it goes.
Secretary Clinton may be one of the highest-profile attendees at Tuesday's Kabul Conference, but
Afghan women fear their opinions won't be heard—and they worry new deals with fighters will roll
back their hard-fought rights.
As Hillary Clinton prepares to attend Tuesday's Kabul Conference, Afghan women are delivering a plain message to
government and international officials: Women's voices should be heard.
""We have to be honest. With respect to the Kabul Conference, we have not been consulted,"" said Soraya Pakzad, founder
of a women's shelter in the western Afghan city of Herat. Her comment came during an unusually heated question-and-
answer session with Afghan Finance Minister Omar Zakhilwal and United Nations representative Staffan de
Mistura marking the end of a two-day women's conference. ""We want to be involved in policy-making. We don't want our
presence to be purely symbolic.""
""Women's rights and achievements should not be compromised in any peace negotiations or
accords.""
The Kabul Conference is, in part, built on symbolism. A follow-up to January's London Conference, the gathering marks
the first time Afghanistan has played host to its international donors, a decision that is intended to showcase the transition
from foreign to Afghan ownership of national priorities. More than 65 international delegations are expected to descend
upon the Afghan capital, which is already enduring security crackdowns and traffic gridlock. Workers could be seen
Sunday painting curbs and planting flowers in advance of the foreigners' arrival.
Discussions will center around five topics, including economic development, agriculture, governance, and security. The
goal of the half-day event is to establish a framework for Afghan leadership in the setting—and execution—of the
country's political and economic direction.
Although it remains to be seen how quickly the Afghan govemment, long under-resourced and beset by allegations of
corruption, will be able to take the reins from its international donors, there is no question that Afghan ownership is the
direction in which things are moving, on the political, economic, and security fronts. And that is precisely why women feel
the stakes for this week's meeting are so high, particularly in light of new deals to empower local militias that might
threaten women's rights.
""After the Kabul Conference, no one knows what else could be on the agenda apart from war escalations and
negotiations,"" said Orzala Ashraf, an Afghan human rights activist. ""This is very important for us, to get a serious and
honest commitment from our government in the presence of all witnesses from the world that our voices will not be
silenced.""
Ashraf and a number of other women's advocates view Tuesday's talks are their last, best shot at speaking out about their
concerns, with help from European and American officials who have been working hard to help them win a seat at the
table. In another show of support, Secretary Clinton and Danish Foreign Minister Lene Espersen will meet Tuesday
morning with a group of women leaders.
Regardless of this high-profile backing, many women say they have little faith in the process to produce anything aside
from more paper and more unkept promises.
""Women are very tired of all these conferences; the government is going to have to show commitments,"" said Selay
Ghaffar, an Afghan Women's Network board member. ""We want things to change.""
And it remains unclear how many Afghans outside Kabul, men or women, are paying attention to yet another gathering to
discuss their future.
""Women in the provinces don't even know about this,"" said Zainab, a young math teacher from Helmand province. ""I
would say 60 percent of women have no idea this is going on.""
Others say the presence of one or two women at the Kabul Conference isn't enough to make a difference. And they say
they fear the recent move from NATO to empower local militias to fight the Taliban, particularly in southern Afghanistan.
""This is very dangerous,"" said Shahida Hussain, a human rights advocate from Kandahar who worked as a community
organizer during the Taliban years. ""We had militias during the communist years and Afghanistan was destroyed. We fear
war again.""
Women leaders say that they want peace and are glad to welcome back former fighters, but only if they respect women's
constitutional guarantee to equal protections under the law.
""Women should be a constituent part of all bodies outlined in the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Plan,"" said the
women in a statement at the end of their meeting. ""Women's rights and achievements should not be compromised in any
peace negotiations or accords.""
In the meantime, women continue to fight for a voice as Tuesday approaches. After a weeklong flurry of conference calls,
embassy meetings, and lunchtime gatherings, two women aside from government ministers are now slated to speak.
And in a small victory for women, international officials agreed with Pakzad's assessment before pledging that women
would be more involved going forward.
""I agree, you were not consulted,"" said da Mistura, appearing to contradict the Afghan finance minister, who only a few
moments earlier had said that women's views had and would be included. ""As usual, we have been paying lip service to
you and we are all at fault for that.""
Gayle Tzemach Lemmon covered presidential politics as a producer at ABC News in Washington. Since 2005, she has
been reporting on women entrepreneurs starting small and medium-sized businesses in post-conflict economies such as
Afghanistan, Bosnia and Rwanda. She is currently working on a book scheduled for 2010 publication by HarperCollins
about a young Afghan entrepreneur whose business supported her family and community during the Taliban years."
5619,Have you been dictating to the NYT?? Exactly what you have been emphasizing. AM
5620,"The House Appropriations Committee is apparently going to revise it's allocation for State/USAID — it is reportedly some
$1.3 billion better (!). So, the overall cut would be closer to $2.7 billion, not $4 billion. Will report back when that is
finalized. Some good news for a change."
5621,"No!! And I'm clearly CCd; I have no idea why I missed this.
I will make these edits immediately and send to you, Huma, and Jake."
5622,Great.
5623,"We didn't receive this email last night for some reason but we were working thru similar additions - Megan will have for
you soon."
5624,We'll have it to you in 15 mins.
5625,Fyi
5626,Fyi
5627,"Thank you for all you did on behalf of the Afghan women on your whirlwind visit. Emails of gratitude to you are pouring
in from Afghanistan. Many of the women listened to your intervention and commented on that as well as your small
meeting.
Yesterday, I had to speak at an event with the Congressional Women's Caucus on Maternal Health in Afghanistan. I said
that as we were meeting in the Cannon Caucus Room , you were making a major maternal health announcement in
Afghanistan. The women Members were overjoyed as were all the health advocates.
This article from the Guardian was sent to me by a UK parliamentarian who intends to echo your remarks. Also, Andrea
Mitchell did a great piece on your meeting with the women on NBC.
> Hillary Clinton vows to defend rights of Afghan women
> US secretary of state tells foreign ministers meeting in Kabul women 'will not be sacrificed' in any peace deal with the
Taliban
> Jon Boone in Kabul
> Wednesday July 21 2010
> The Guardian
> http://mvw.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/jul/20/hillary-clinton-afghan-women-taliban
> Jon Boone
> Hillary Clinton today promised that any peace deal with the ultra-conservative Taliban movement would not come at the
cost of the rights of Afghan women.
> The US secretary of state told a conference of the world's foreign ministers that women in the country ""will not be
sacrificed"" and announced a number of initiatives to improve their situation.
> Her intervention came when many diplomats assume that any deal with hardline insurgents will inevitably involve
compromises that would have been unthinkable nine years ago, when the US-led invasion of Afghanistan was in part
justified by the desire to emancipate Afghan women.
> But in a meeting with leading Afghan women today Clinton told them that any deal ""can't come at the cost of women and
women's lives"".
> ""We are aware of the concerns that many of you have expressed about the reconciliation process and we understand
why you would have those concerns,"" Clinton told them.
> Anxious to put the issue on the agenda of her fellow foreign ministers, she told the conference that women and civil
society groups ""will be essential to this country's success.""
> ""If these groups are fully empowered to help build a just and lasting peace, they will help do so,"" she said. ""If they are
silenced and pushed to the margins of Afghan society, the prospects for peace and justice will be subverted.""
> She also announced extra US funding for projects to improve maternal and child health, including one scheme that will
use mullahs to encourage women to make use of clinics. In rural Afghan society, where they are often not allowed to
leave the house without their husband's permission, women are sometimes discouraged from seeking medical care.
> The final conference communique recognised ""the centrality of women's rights to the future of Afghanistan"".
> Earlier this month, a report by Human Rights Watch said the Afghan government was already doing little to protect
women and that their rights should be a priority in any political agreement with the Taliban.
> The organisation said in areas under the control of militants, women suffer from violence and intimidation while girls'
schools and female activists are attacked. The report identified one case where a female civil servant had to quit her job
after receiving a ""night letter"" from insurgents threatening to kill her.
> If you have any questions about this email, please contact the guardian.co.uk user help desk:
userhelpguardian.co.uk.
Get a new e-mail account with Hotmail - Free. Sign-up now. ="
5628,"41101■
11MIMMIII@IIMIIIIMONIN"
5629,Fyi.
5630,Fyi
5631,"'Inept' US cannot fix Afghanistan: top Saudi prince Sun, May 16, 2010
RIYADH (AFP)— An ""inept"" United States cannot fix Afghanistan's problems and should simply focus on ""chasing the
terrorists"" there, former Saudi intelligence chief Prince Turki al-Faisal said on Saturday.
The ex-ambassador to the United States also challenged Washington to produce results in just-started Middle East
peace talks, and accused US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton of undermining efforts to make the region nuclear-free.
AFP — Saudi Arabia's former intelligence chief Prince Turki al-Faisal delivers a speech during a conference ...
In a speech in Riyadh before diplomats, Turki said US-led NATO troops had irrevocably alienated the Afghan people and
had no hope of rebuilding the country.
""What Afghanistan needs now is a shift from nation-building to effectively countering terrorists,"" Turki told the Arab
News conference.
US President Barack Obama ""should not be misdirected into believing that he can fix Afghanistan's ills by military
means.""
""Hunt down the terrorists on both sides of the Afghan-Pakistan border, arrest them or kill them, and get out, and let the
Afghan people deal with their problems.
""As long as GI boots remain on Afghan soil, they remain targets of resistance for the Afghan people and ideological
mercenaries.""
Turki, who has long served a central role in Saudi-Afghan relations, scolded Washington's handling of relations with
Kabul.
""The inept way in which this administration has dealt with President (Hamid) Karzai beggars disbelief and amazement.
""Both sides are now filled with resentment and a sour taste in their mouths,"" he said. ""How can they both get out of that
situation? I don't know.""
The chairman of the King Faisal Center For Research and Islamic Studies, Turki has no official position but is believed to
often reflect high level thinking in the Saudi government.
He is the brother of Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal, and analysts speculate he could become foreign minister
when Saud retires.
Turki said Arab states have given Washington four months to show progress in US-guided Palestinian-Israeli peace talks.
""The Arab world has given Obama until September to get things done,"" said Turki.
""It is not enough to talk the talk. He has to walk the walk.
""If he does not succeed... then I (will) ask President Obama to do the morally decent gesture and recognise the
Palestinian state that he so ardently wishes to exist.
""He can then pack up and leave us in peace and let the Palestinians, Syrians and Lebanese negotiate directly with the
Israelis. No more platitudes and good wishes and visions, please.""
Turki also faulted the US and European approach in trying to halt Iran's alleged efforts to build a nuclear weapon.
""The discussions on Iran's nuclear ambitions started off on the wrong foot. The carrot and stick approach does not
work,"" he said.
For one, he said, the US and Europe have had double-standards in dealing with Iran on the one hand, and other nuclear
countries on the other.
""You cannot ask Iran to play on one level while you allow Israel, India, Pakistan, and North Korea to play on other levels.""
Turki said a successful strategy toward Iran requires even-handedness, a ""universal nuclear security umbrella"" for the
countries in the area, and ""a good military option"" against any regional country which does not cooperate.
He said Clinton had undermined efforts to move toward a regional nuclear-free zone, after the UN Security Council's five
permanent members recently expressed support for the idea.
""Alas... Clinton then voided the issue of its value by stating that the conditions do not yet exist for establishing the zone,""
he said.
""Why, then, did she join the other members of the P5 in issuing their statement?""
Turki said he hoped Obama ""will find the way to correct his secretary of state's nullification of making our area free of
weapons of mass destruction.""
Turki also warned of rising violence in Iraq after the pullout of US troops next year, warning both internal and external
groups seek to carve up the country.
""Imagine what will happen once internal strife and fighting escalates"" following the US pullout, he said.
Without a UN Security Council effort to protect Iraq's current borders, the consequence could be ""regional conflict on a
scale not seen since the Ottoman-Safavid wars of the 17th and 18th centuries,"" he warned."
5632,Fyi
5633,"Defer to Jake, but checking in with NEA (Jeff's on travel so might take a little longer)"
5634,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, May 16, 2010 6:40 PM
preines
Re: AFP
B6
I'll talk to Bill about it - not at all sure what is driving this."
5635,Fyi
5638,"I'm pretty sure I gave the original to lauren as soon a I received it. Doubt I made a copy but I may have cause he'd asked
for a tour. Let me check tomorrow."
5639,"WASHINGTON (AP) - The Obama administration targeted key leaders of Afghanistan's Taliban with new financial
sanctions Thursday in a move that could complicate relations with Pakistan and Afghan efforts to reconcile with
insurgents.
The action by the Treasury Department will freeze the militants' assets, ban travel and trigger an arms embargo. It
follows similar action by the United Nations earlier this week, and comes after calls from Gen. David Petraeus, the top
military commander in Afghanistan, and Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, for
sanctions against Afghan insurgent commanders operating in Pakistan.
Taken together, the U.S. and U.N. sanctions prohibit any financial transactions of the terror leaders in U.N. member
countries, putting additional pressure on Pakistan to take broader actions against the Taliban militants.
Three financial kingpins were targeted with sanctions, including a key member of the Haqqani network, which,directs
operations against U.S. and coalition forces in Afghanistan from safe havens in Pakistan. Among those sanctioned
Thursday was Nasiruddin Haqqani, an emissary for the Haqqani Network and brother of Sirajuddin Haqqani who leads
the group with his father, Jalaluddin.
Others sanctioned included Gul Agha Ishakzai, the head of the Taliban's financial commission and Amir Abdullah, the
former treasurer to captured Taliban leader Mullah Abdul Ghani Barader. The sanctions placed on the three leaders as
terrorists would deprive them of the assets they need to fund their terror operations, said Adam J. Szubin, director of
Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control. ""We will continue to aggressively work to expose and dismantle the financial
networks of terrorist groups in support of the president's goal of a stable Afghanistan,"" he said.
According to officials, lshakzai is the head of the Taliban's financial commission, has collected money for suicide attacks
in Kandahar, Afghanistan, and has been involved in the disbursement of funds for Taliban fighters. He has served as a
main financial officer and close adviser to Taliban leader Mullah Mohammad Omar. Abdullah has reportedly traveled to
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Libya and the United Arab Emirates to raise money for the Taliban and facilitate meetings and
communications with key leaders. Nasiruddin Haqqani has collected funds for the Haqqani group, including from al-
Qaida. Last week, Gen. David Petraeus, the top military commander in Afghanistan, urged officials to add commanders
from the Haqqani network to the terrorist list. At the time, administration officials said a review was under way, largely
accelerated after the May 1 failed Times Square bombing. The man who has pleaded guilty in the New York incident,
Pakistani-born American Faisal Shahzad, said he trained with the Pakistani Taliban to build bombs, then returned to the
U.S. to launch an attack that would avenge attacks on Muslims by U.S. forces overseas."
5640,"Latest update:
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, May 16, 2010 10:30 PM
H
Mills, Cheryl D
Iran"
5641,"H: I'm sure you are preoccupied with the adventures of Lula, et al. Nonetheless, the article below, just posted by the NY
Review, soon to be published, is a breakthrough piece that will have a large impact. It's worth reading, not least for Frank
Luntz's poll numbers. The hysterical tone of much of the Israeli leadership and US Jewish community is partly rooted in
this long-term and profound development. Sid
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2010/jun/10/failure-american-jewish-establishment/
The Failure of the American Jewish Establishment
June 10, 2010
by Peter Beinart
E-mail Single Page Share More by Peter Beinart
anjamin Netanyahu; drawing by John Springs
In 2003, several prominent Jewish philanthropists hired Republican pollster Frank Luntz to explain why American Jewish
college students were not more vigorously rebutting campus criticism of Israel. In response, he unwittingly produced the
most damning indictment of the organized American Jewish community that I have ever seen.
The philanthropists wanted to know what Jewish students thought about Israel. Luntz found that they mostly didn't. ""Six
times we have brought Jewish youth together as a group to talk about their Jewishness and connection to Israel,"" he
reported. ""Six times the topic of Israel did not come up until it was prompted. Six times these Jewish youth used the word
'they' rather than'us` to describe the situation.""
That Luntz encountered indifference was not surprising. In recent years, several studies have revealed, in the words of
Steven Cohen of Hebrew Union College and An Kelman of the University of California at Davis, that ""non-Orthodox
younger Jews, on the whole, feel much less attached to Israel than their elders,"" with many professing ""a near-total
absence of positive feelings."" In 2008, the student senate at Brandeis, the only nonsectarian Jewish-sponsored university
in America, rejected a resolution commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the Jewish state.
Luntz's task was to figure out what had gone wrong. When he probed the students' views of Israel, he hit up against some
firm beliefs. First, ""they reserve the right to question the Israeli position."" These young Jews, Luntz explained, ""resist
anything they see as 'group think."" They want an ""open and frank"" discussion of Israel and its flaws. Second, ""young
Jews desperately want peace."" When Luntz showed them a series of ads, one of the most popular was entitled ""Proof that
Israel Wants Peace,"" and listed offers by various Israeli governments to withdraw from conquered land. Third, ""some
empathize with the plight of the Palestinians."" When Luntz displayed ads depicting Palestinians as violent and hateful,
several focus group participants criticized them as stereotypical and unfair, citing their own Muslim friends.
Most of the students, in other words, were liberals, broadly defined. They had imbibed some of the defining values of
American Jewish political culture: a belief in open debate, a skepticism about military force, a commitment to human
rights. And in their innocence, they did not realize that they were supposed to shed those values when it came to Israel.
The only kind of Zionism they found attractive was a Zionism that recognized Palestinians as deserving of dignity and
capable of peace, and they were quite willing to condemn an Israeli government that did not share those beliefs. Luntz did
not grasp the irony. The only kind of Zionism they found attractive was the kind that the American Jewish establishment
has been working against for most of their lives.
Among American Jews today, there are a great many Zionists, especially in the Orthodox world, people deeply devoted to
the State of Israel. And there are a great many liberals, especially in the secular Jewish world, people deeply devoted to
human rights for all people, Palestinians included. But the two groups are increasingly distinct. Particularly in the younger
generations, fewer and fewer American Jewish liberals are Zionists; fewer and fewer American Jewish Zionists are liberal.
One reason is that the leading institutions of American Jewry have refused to foster—indeed, have actively opposed—a
Zionism that challenges Israel's behavior in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and toward its own Arab citizens. For several
decades, the Jewish establishment has asked American Jews to check their liberalism at Zionism's door, and now, to their
horror, they are finding that many young Jews have checked their Zionism instead.
Morally, American Zionism is in a downward spiral. If the leaders of groups like AIPAC and the Conference of Presidents
of Major American Jewish Organizations do not change course, they will wake up one day to find a younger, Orthodox-
dominated, Zionist leadership whose naked hostility to Arabs and Palestinians scares even them, and a mass of secular
American Jews who range from apathetic to appalled. Saving liberal Zionism in the United States—so that American Jews
can help save liberal Zionism in Israel—is the great American Jewish challenge of our age. And it starts where Luntz's
students wanted it to start: by talking frankly about Israel's current government, by no longer averting our eyes.
Since the 1990s, journalists and scholars have been describing a bifurcation in Israeli society. In the words of Hebrew
University political scientist Yaron Ezrahi, ""After decades of what came to be called a national consensus, the Zionist
narrative of liberation [has] dissolved into openly contesting versions."" One version, ""founded on a long memory of
persecution, genocide, and a bitter struggle for survival, is pessimistic, distrustful of non-Jews, and believing only in
Jewish power and solidarity."" Another, ""nourished by secularized Versions of messianism as well as the Enlightenment
idea of progress,"" articulates ""a deep sense of the limits of military force, and a commitment to liberal-democratic values.""
Every country manifests some kind of ideological divide. But in contemporary Israel, the gulf is among the widest on earth.
As Ezrahi and others have noted, this latter, liberal-democratic Zionism has grown alongside a new individualism,
particularly among secular Israelis, a greater demand for free expression, and a greater skepticism of coercive authority.
You can see this spirit in ""new historians"" like Tom Segev who have fearlessly excavated the darker corners of the Zionist
past and in jurists like former Supreme Court President Aharon Barak who have overturned Knesset laws that violate the
human rights guarantees in Israel's ""Basic Laws."" You can also see it in former Prime Minister Ehud Barak's apparent
willingness to relinquish much of the West Bank in 2000 and early 2001.
But in Israel today, this humane, universalistic Zionism does not wield power. To the contrary, it is gasping for air. To
understand how deeply antithetical its values are to those of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's government, it's worth
considering the case of Effi Eitam. Eitam, a charismatic ex–cabinet minister and war hero, has proposed ethnically
cleansing Palestinians from the West Bank. ""We'll have to expel the overwhelming majority of West Bank Arabs from here
and remove Israeli Arabs from [the] political system,"" he declared in 2006. In 2008, Eitam merged his small Ahi Party into
Netanyahu's Likud. And for the 2009-2010 academic year, he is Netanyahu's special emissary for overseas ""campus
engagement."" In that capacity, he visited a dozen American high schools and colleges last fall on the Israeli government's
behalf. The group that organized his tour was called ""Caravan for Democracy.""
Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman once shared Eitam's views. In his youth, he briefly joined Meir Kahane's now
banned Kach Party, which also advocated the expulsion of Arabs from Israeli soil. Now Lieberman's position might be
called ""pre-expulsion."" He wants to revoke the citizenship of Israeli Arabs who won't swear a loyalty oath to the Jewish
state. He tried to prevent two Arab parties that opposed Israel's 2008-2009 Gaza war from running candidates for the
Knesset. He said Arab Knesset members who met with representatives of Hamas should be executed. He wants to jail
Arabs who publicly mourn on Israeli Independence Day, and he hopes to permanently deny citizenship to Arabs from
other countries who marry Arab citizens of Israel.
You don't have to be paranoid to see the connection between Lieberman's current views and his former ones. The more
you strip Israeli Arabs of legal protection, and the more you accuse them of treason, the more thinkable a policy of
expulsion becomes. Lieberman's American defenders often note that in theory he supports a Palestinian state. What they
usually fail to mention is that for him, a two-state solution means redrawing Israel's border so that a large chunk of Israeli
Arabs find themselves exiled to another country, without their consent.
Lieberman served as chief of staff during Netanyahu's first term as prime minister. And when it comes to the West Bank,
Netanyahu's own record is in its way even more extreme than his protégé's. In his 1993 book, A Place among the
Nations, Netanyahu not only rejects the idea of a Palestinian state, he denies that there is such a thing as a Palestinian. In
fact, he repeatedly equates the Palestinian bid for statehood with Nazism. An Israel that withdraws from the West Bank,
he has declared, would be a ""ghetto-state"" with ""Auschwitz borders."" And the effort ""to gouge Judea and Samaria [the
West Bank] out of Israel"" resembles Hitler's bid to wrench the German-speaking ""Sudeten district"" from Czechoslovakia in
1938. It is unfair, Netanyahu insists, to ask Israel to concede more territory since it has already made vast, gut-wrenching
concessions. What kind of concessions? It has abandoned its claim to Jordan, which by rights should be part of the
Jewish state.
On the left of Netanyahu's coalition sits Ehud Barak's emasculated Labor Party, but whatever moderating potential it may
have is counterbalanced by what is, in some ways, the most illiberal coalition partner of all, Shas, the ultra-Orthodox party
representing Jews of North African and Middle Eastern descent. At one point, Shas—like some of its Ashkenazi ultra-
Orthodox counterparts—was open to dismantling settlements. In recent years, however, ultra-Orthodox Israelis, anxious
to find housing for their large families, have increasingly moved to the West Bank, where thanks to government subsidies
it is far cheaper to live. Not coincidentally, their political parties have swung hard against territorial compromise. And they
have done so with a virulence that reflects ultra-Orthodox Judaism's profound hostility to liberal values. Rabbi Ovadia
Yosef, Shas's immensely powerful spiritual leader, has called Arabs ""vipers,"" ""snakes,"" and ""ants."" In 2005, after Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon proposed dismantling settlements in the Gaza Strip, Yosef urged that ""God strike him down."" The
official Shas newspaper recently called President Obama ""an Islamic extremist.""
Hebrew University Professor Ze'ev Sternhell is an expert on fascism and a winner of the prestigious Israel Prize.
Commenting on Lieberman and the leaders of Shas in a recent Op-Ed in Haaretz, he wrote, ""The last time politicians
holding views similar to theirs were in power in post–World War II Western Europe was in Franco's Spain."" With their
blessing, ""a crude and multifaceted campaign is being waged against the foundations of the democratic and liberal order.""
Sternhell should know. In September 2008, he was injured when a settler set off a pipe bomb at his house.
Israeli governments come and go, but the Netanyahu coalition is the product of frightening, long-term trends in Israeli
society: an ultra-Orthodox population that is increasing dramatically, a settler movement that is growing more radical and
more entrenched in the Israeli bureaucracy and army, and a Russian immigrant community that is particularly prone to
anti-Arab racism. In 2009, a poll by the Israel Democracy Institute found that 53 percent of Jewish Israelis (and 77 percent
of recent immigrants from the former USSR) support encouraging Arabs to leave the country. Attitudes are worst among
Israel's young. When Israeli high schools held mock elections last year, Lieberman won. This March, a poll found that 56
percent of Jewish Israeli high school students—and more than 80 percent of religious Jewish high school students—
would deny Israeli Arabs the right to be elected to the Knesset. An education ministry official called the survey ""a huge
warning signal in light of the strengthening trends of extremist views among the youth.""
You might think that such trends, and the sympathy for them expressed by some in Israel's government, would occasion
substantial public concern—even outrage—among the leaders of organized American Jewry. You would be wrong. In
Israel itself, voices from the left, and even center, warn in increasingly urgent tones about threats to Israeli democracy.
(Former Prime Ministers Ehud Olmert and Ehud Barak have both said that Israel risks becoming an ""apartheid state"" if it
continues to hold the West Bank. This April, when settlers forced a large Israeli bookstore to stop selling a book critical of
the occupation, Shulamit Aloni, former head of the dovish Meretz Party, declared that ""Israel has not been democratic for
some time now."") But in the United States, groups like AIPAC and the Presidents' Conference patrol public discourse,
scolding people who contradict their vision of Israel as a state in which all leaders cherish democracy and yearn
for peace.
The result is a terrible irony. In theory, mainstream American Jewish organizations still hew to a liberal vision of Zionism.
On its website, AIPAC celebrates Israel's commitment to ""free speech and minority rights."" The Conference of Presidents
declares that ""Israel and the United States share political, moral and intellectual values including democracy, freedom,
security and peace."" These groups would never say, as do some in Netanyahu's coalition, that Israeli Arabs don't deserve
full citizenship and West Bank Palestinians don't deserve human rights. But in practice, by defending virtually anything
any Israeli government does, they make themselves intellectual bodyguards for Israeli leaders who threaten the very
liberal values they profess to admire.
After Israel's elections last February, for instance, Malcolm Hoenlein, executive vice-chairman of the Presidents'
Conference, explained that Avigdor Lieberman's agenda was ""far more moderate than the media has presented it.""
Insisting that Lieberman bears no general animus toward Israeli Arabs, Abraham Foxman, national director of the Anti-
Defamation League, told the Jewish Telegraphic Agency that ""He's not saying expel them. He's not saying punish them.""
(Permanently denying citizenship to their Arab spouses or jailing them if they publicly mourn on Israeli Independence Day
evidently does not qualify as punishment.) The ADL has criticized anti-Arab bigotry in the past, and the American Jewish
Committee, to its credit, warned that Lieberman's proposed loyalty oath would ""chill Israel's democratic political debate.""
But the Forward summed up the overall response of America's communal Jewish leadership in its headline ""Jewish
Leaders Largely Silent on Lieberman's Role in Government.""
Not only does the organized American Jewish community mostly avoid public criticism of the Israeli government, it tries to
prevent others from leveling such criticism as well. In recent years, American Jewish organizations have waged a
campaign to discredit the world's most respected international human rights groups. In 2006, Foxman called an Amnesty
International report on Israeli killing of Lebanese civilians ""bigoted, biased, and borderline anti-Semitic."" The Conference
of Presidents has announced that ""biased NGOs include Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, Christian Aid, [and]
Save the Children."" Last summer, an AIPAC spokesman declared that Human Rights Watch ""has repeatedly
demonstrated its anti-Israel bias."" When the Obama administration awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Mary
Robinson, former UN high commissioner for human rights, the ADL and AIPAC both protested, citing the fact that she had
presided over the 2001 World Conference Against Racism in Durban, South Africa. (Early drafts of the conference report
implicitly accused Israel of racism. Robinson helped expunge that defamatory charge, angering Syria and Iran.)
Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International are not infallible. But when groups like AIPAC and the Presidents'
Conference avoid virtually all public criticism of Israeli actions—directing their outrage solely at Israel's neighbors—they
leave themselves in a poor position to charge bias. Moreover, while American Jewish groups claim that they are simply
defending Israel from its foes, they are actually taking sides in a struggle within Israel between radically different Zionist
visions. At the very moment the Anti-Defamation League claimed that Robinson harbored an ""animus toward Israel,"" an
alliance of seven Israeli human rights groups publicly congratulated her on her award. Many of those groups, like
B'Tselem, which monitors Israeli actions in the Occupied Territories, and the Israeli branch of Physicians for Human
Rights, have been at least as critical of Israel's actions in Lebanon, Gaza, and the West Bank as have Amnesty
International and Human Rights Watch.
All of which raises an uncomfortable question. If American Jewish groups claim that Israel's overseas human rights critics
are motivated by anti- Israeli, if not anti-Semitic, bias, what does that say about Israel's domestic human rights critics?
The implication is clear: they must be guilty of self-hatred, if not treason. American Jewish leaders don't generally say
that, of course, but their allies in the Netanyahu government do. Last summer, Israel's vice prime minister, Moshe Ya'alon,
called the anti-occupation group Peace Now a ""virus."" This January, a right-wing group called Im Tirtzu accused Israeli
human rights organizations of having fed information to the Goldstone Commission that investigated Israel's Gaza war. A
Knesset member from Netanyahu's Likud promptly charged Naomi Chazan, head of the New Israel Fund, which supports
some of those human rights groups, with treason, and a member of Lieberman's party launched an investigation aimed at
curbing foreign funding of Israeli NG0s.
To their credit, Foxman and other American Jewish leaders opposed the move, which might have impaired their own
work. But they are reaping what they sowed. If you suggest that mainstream human rights criticism of Israel's government
is motivated by animus toward the state, or toward Jews in general, you give aid and comfort to those in Israel who make
the same charges against the human rights critics in their midst.
In the American Jewish establishment today, the language of liberal Zionism—with its idioms of human rights, equal
citizenship, and territorial compromise—has been drained of meaning. It remains the lingua franca in part for generational
reasons, because many older American Zionists still see themselves as liberals of a sort. They vote Democratic; they are
unmoved by biblical claims to the West Bank; they see average Palestinians as decent people betrayed by bad leaders;
and they are secular. They don't want Jewish organizations to criticize Israel from the left, but neither do they want them
to be agents of the Israeli right.
These American Zionists are largely the product of a particular era. Many were shaped by the terrifying days leading up to
the Six-Day War, when it appeared that Israel might be overrun, and by the bitter aftermath of the Yom Kippur War, when
much of the world seemed to turn against the Jewish state. In that crucible, Israel became their Jewish identity, often in
conjunction with the Holocaust, which the 1967 and 1973 wars helped make central to American Jewish life. These Jews
embraced Zionism before the settler movement became a major force in Israeli politics, before the 1982 Lebanon war,
before the first intifada. They fell in love with an Israel that was more secular, less divided, and less shaped by the culture,
politics, and theology of occupation. And by downplaying the significance of Avigdor Lieberman, the settlers, and Shas,
American Jewish groups allow these older Zionists to continue to identify with that more internally cohesive, more
innocent Israel of their youth, an Israel that now only exists in their memories.
But these secular Zionists aren't reproducing themselves. Their children have no memory of Arab armies massed on
Israel's border and of Israel surviving in part thanks to urgent military assistance from the United States. Instead, they
have grown up viewing Israel as a regional hegemon and an occupying power. As a result, they are more conscious than
their parents of the degree to which Israeli behavior violates liberal ideals, and less willing to grant Israel an exemption
because its survival seems in peril. Because they have inherited their parents' liberalism, they cannot embrace their
uncritical Zionism. Because their liberalism is real, they can see that the liberalism of the American Jewish establishment
is fake.
To sustain their uncritical brand of Zionism, therefore, America's Jewish organizations will need to look elsewhere to
replenish their ranks. They will need to find young American. Jews who have come of age during the West Bank
occupation but are not troubled by it. And those young American Jews will come disproportionately from the
Orthodox world.
Because they marry earlier, intermarry less, and have more children, Orthodox Jews are growing rapidly as a share of the
American Jewish population. According to a 2006 American Jewish Committee (AJC) survey, while Orthodox Jews make
up only 12 percent of American Jewry over the age of sixty, they constitute 34 percent between the ages of eighteen and
twenty-four. For America's Zionist organizations, these Orthodox youngsters are a potential bonanza. In their yeshivas
they learn devotion to Israel from an early age; they generally spend a year of religious study there after high school, and
often know friends or relatives who have immigrated to Israel. The same AJC study found that while only 16 percent of
non-Orthodox adult Jews under the age of forty feel ""very close to Israel,"" among the Orthodox the figure is 79 percent. As
secular Jews drift away from America's Zionist institutions, their Orthodox counterparts will likely step into the breach. The
Orthodox ""are still interested in parochial Jewish concerns,"" explains Samuel Heilman, a sociologist at the City University
of New York. ""They are among the last ones who stayed in the Jewish house, so they now control the lights.""
But it is this very parochialism—a deep commitment to Jewish concerns, which often outweighs more universal ones—
that gives Orthodox Jewish Zionism a distinctly illiberal cast. The 2006 AJC poll found that while 60 percent of non-
Orthodox American Jews under the age of forty support a Palestinian state, that figure drops to 25 percent among the
Orthodox. In 2009, when Brandeis University's Theodore Sasson asked American Jewish focus groups about Israel, he
found Orthodox participants much less supportive of dismantling settlements as part of a peace deal. Even more tellingly,
Reform, Conservative, and unaffiliated Jews tended to believe that average Palestinians wanted peace, but had been ill-
served by their leaders. Orthodox Jews, by contrast, were more likely to see the Palestinian people as the enemy, and to
deny that ordinary Palestinians shared any common interests or values with ordinary Israelis or Jews.
Orthodox Judaism has great virtues, including a communal warmth and a commitment to Jewish learning unmatched in
the American Jewish world. (I'm biased, since my family attends an Orthodox synagogue.) But if current trends continue,
the growing influence of Orthodox Jews in America's Jewish communal institutions will erode even the liberal-democratic
veneer that today covers American Zionism. In 2002, America's major Jewish organizations sponsored a large Israel
solidarity rally on the Washington Mall. Up and down the east coast, yeshivas shut down for the day, swelling the
estimated Orthodox share of the crowd to close to 70 percent. When the then Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul
Wolfowitz told the rally that ""innocent Palestinians are suffering and dying as well,"" he was booed.
America's Jewish leaders should think hard about that rally. Unless they change course, it portends the future: an
American Zionist movement that does not even feign concern for Palestinian dignity and a broader American Jewish
population that does not even feign concern for Israel. My own children, given their upbringing, could as easily end up
among the booers as among Luntz's focus group. Either prospect fills me with dread.
In 2004, in an effort to prevent weapons smuggling from Egypt, Israeli tanks and bulldozers demolished hundreds of
houses in the Rafah refugee camp in the southern Gaza Strip. Watching television, a veteran Israeli commentator and
politician named Tommy Lapid saw an elderly Palestinian woman crouched on all fours looking for her medicines amid the
ruins of her home. He said she reminded him of his grandmother.
In that moment, Lapid captured the spirit that is suffocating within organized American Jewish life. To begin with, he
watched. In my experience, there is an epidemic of not watching among American Zionists today. A Red Cross study on
malnutrition in the Gaza Strip, a bill in the Knesset to allow Jewish neighborhoods to bar entry to Israeli Arabs, an Israeli
human rights report on settlers burning Palestinian olive groves, three more Palestinian teenagers shot—it's unpleasant.
Rationalizing and minimizing Palestinian suffering has become a kind of game. In a more recent report on how to foster
Zionism among America's young, Luntz urges American Jewish groups to use the word ""Arabs, not Palestinians,"" since
""the term `Palestinians' evokes images of refugee camps, victims and oppression,"" while ""Arab' says wealth, oil
and Islam.""
Of course, Israel—like the United States—must sometimes take morally difficult actions in its own defense. But they are
morally difficult only if you allow yourself some human connection to the other side. Otherwise, security justifies
everything. The heads of AIPAC and the Presidents' Conference should ask themselves what Israel's leaders would have
to do or say to make them scream ""no."" After all, Lieberman is foreign minister; Effi Eitam is touring American universities;
settlements are growing at triple the rate of the Israeli population; half of Israeli Jewish high school students want Arabs
barred from the Knesset. If the line has not yet been crossed, where is the line?
What infuriated critics about Lapid's comment was that his grandmother died at Auschwitz. How dare he defile the
memory of the Holocaust? Of course, the Holocaust is immeasurably worse than anything Israel has done or ever will do.
•
But at least Lapid used Jewish suffering to connect to the suffering of others. In the world of AIPAC, the Holocaust
analogies never stop, and their message is always the same: Jews are licensed by their victimhood to worry only about
themselves. Many of Israel's founders believed that with statehood, Jews would rightly be judged on the way they treated
the non-Jews living under their dominion. ""For the first time we shall be the majority living with a minority,"" Knesset
member Pinchas Lavon declared in 1948, ""and we shall be called upon to provide an example and prove how Jews live
with a minority.""
But the message of the American Jewish establishment and its allies in the Netanyahu government is exactly the
opposite: since Jews are history's permanent victims, always on the knife-edge of extinction, moral responsibility is a
luxury Israel does not have. Its only responsibility is to survive. As former Knesset speaker Avraham Burg writes in his
remarkable 2008 book, The Holocaust Is Over; We Must Rise From Its Ashes, ""Victimhood sets you free.""
This obsession with victimhood lies at the heart of why Zionism is dying among America's secular Jewish young. It simply
bears no relationship to their lived experience, or what they have seen of Israel's. Yes, Israel faces threats from Hezbollah
and Hamas. Yes, Israelis understandably worry about a nuclear Iran. But the dilemmas you face when you possess
dozens or hundreds of nuclear weapons, and your adversary, however despicable, may acquire one, are not the
dilemmas of the Warsaw Ghetto. The year 2010 is not, as Benjamin Netanyahu has claimed, 1938. The drama of Jewish
victimhood—a drama that feels natural to many Jews who lived through 1938, 1948, or even 1967—strikes most of
today's young American Jews as farce.
But there is a different Zionist calling, which has never been more desperately relevant. It has its roots in Israel's
Independence Proclamation, which promised that the Jewish state ""will be based on the precepts of liberty, justice and
peace taught by the Hebrew prophets,"" and in the December 1948 letter from Albert Einstein, Hannah Arendt, and others
to The New York Times, protesting right-wing Zionist leader Menachem Begin's visit to the United States after his party's
militias massacred Arab civilians in the village of Deir Yassin. It is a call to recognize that in a world in which Jewish
fortunes have radically changed, the best way to memorialize the history of Jewish suffering is through the ethical use of
Jewish power.
For several months now, a group of Israeli students has been traveling every Friday to the East Jerusalem neighborhood
of Sheikh Jarrah, where a Palestinian family named the Ghawis lives on the street outside their home of fifty-three years,
from which they were evicted to make room for Jewish settlers. Although repeatedly arrested for protesting without a
permit, and called traitors and self-haters by the Israeli right, the students keep coming, their numbers now swelling into
the thousands. What if American Jewish organizations brought these young people to speak at Hillel? What if this was the
face of Zionism shown to America's Jewish young? What if the students in Luntz's focus group had been told that their
generation faces a challenge as momentous as any in Jewish history: to save liberal democracy in the only Jewish state
on earth?
""Too many years I lived in the warm embrace of institutionalized elusiveness and was a part of it,"" writes Avraham Burg. ""I
was very comfortable there."" I know; I was comfortable there too. But comfortable Zionism has become a moral
abdication. Let's hope that Luntz's students, in solidarity with their counterparts at Sheikh Jarrah, can foster an
uncomfortable Zionism, a Zionism angry at what Israel risks becoming, and in love with what it still could be. Let's hope
they care enough to try.
—May 12, 2010 .
Peter Beinart is Associate Professor of Journalism and Political Science at the City University of New York, a Senior
Fellow at the New America Foundation, and Senior Political Writer for The Daily Beast. His new book, The Icarus
Syndrome: A History of American Hubris, will be published in June."
5642,"You may have been alerted to this incident: the barring of Noam Chomsky from Israel. His political views may be
ridiculous or objectionable, though he is the greatest linguistic scholar in the world, but barring him for his political opinions
has created a needless PR disaster, not least for the US, as he is, after all, a US citizen, and a very prominent one
internationally. It is unfortunate on every level. And the US should not be a passive onlooker. He is a US citizen barred for
his political views, after all. This story is splashed across the European press this morning. Not what anyone needs, yes,
yes, like a hole in the head, and bone stupid, but the US effort on his behalf to gain entry should be part of the story. This
incident can be profitable if Israel understands it should not be doing this to US or European critics in the future. This is a
downward slope, bad news for everyone involved. S
14 16, 2010, 11:01 pm
Chomsky Barred From West Bank by Israel
By ROBERT MACKEY
Noam Chomsky, an American linguist and political thinker who has been critical of Israel, was denied entry into the West
Bank on Sunday by Israeli immigration officials when he tried to cross into the Palestinian territory from Jordan to deliver a
lecture.
Amira Hass of the Israeli newspaper Haaretz reported:
No reason was initially given for the decision, but the Interior Ministry later said immigration officials at the Allenby Bridge
border crossing from Jordan had misunderstood Chomsky's intentions thinking initially he was also due to visit Israel.
Chomsky, who is on a speaking tour in the region, was scheduled to speak at Bir Zeit University in the West Bank on
Monday.
A spokeswoman for Israel's interior ministry also told Reuters that there had been a misunderstanding and ""officials were
trying to get clearance from the Israeli military, which controls access to the West Bank to allow Chomsky to enter.""
In a television interview from Amman, Jordan, after he was rebuffed, Mr. Chomsky told Al Jazeera English, ""the facts were
completely clear to everyone; there was no basis for a misunderstanding."" He explained that he was interrogated for
several hours before being told that he would not be allowed to cross into the occupied Palestinian territory. The 81-year-
old scholar added:
I can only say what was conveyed to me in the discussion with the official who was carrying out the interrogation — he
was receiving instructions from the [Israeli] ministry of interior and relaying them. There were two basic points. One was
that the government of Israel does not like the kinds of things I say — which puts them into the category of I suppose
every other government in the world. The second was that they seemed upset about the fact that I was just taking an
invitation from Bir Zeit and I had no plans to go on to speak in Israeli universities, as I have done many times in the past
but not this time.
Mr. Chomsky had been invited to speak about American foreign and domestic policy by the philosophy department at the
Palestinian university in Ramallah.
The renowned linguist was outspoken in his opposition to the Israeli offensive in Gaza, which ended in January 2009 and
has criticized Israel's occupation of Palestinian territory many times.
In an interview with Deborah Solomon of The New York Times Magazine in 2003, Mr. Chomsky said, ""I objected to the
founding of Israel as a Jewish state. I don't think a Jewish or Christian or Islamic state is a proper concept. I would object
to the United States as a Christian state."" When Ms. Solomon pressed Mr. Chomsky on his opposition to Israel, saying,
""Your father was a respected Hebraic scholar, and sometimes you sound like a self-hating Jew,"" he replied:
It is a shame that critics of Israeli policies are seen as either anti-Semites or self-hating Jews. It's grotesque. If an Italian
criticized Italian policies, would he be seen as a self-hating Italian?
• Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
• Privacy Policy
• NYTimes.com 620 Eighth Avenue New York, NY 10018"
5643,Davutoglu called about Iran. Wants to speak sometime this morning. We are working to schedule.
5645,"Rich is going to talk to Feingold's COS and walk him through the reasoning/defense of our policy. Since this is a classified
letter, you couldn't talk about it in open session tomorrow in any event, but if he asks you can say that we have had
substantive discussions with his staff on the concerns raised in the letter and you're happy to discuss it further in closed
session."
5646,Yikes. Will track down.
5648,I checked and I do not have an electronic copy of this letter.
5649,"Fyi
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Monday, May 17, 2010 9:58 PM
Fw: (AP) Extradition rumors close Jamaica businesses early"
5650,"Per your discussion with jake, we are doing lavrov call at 8:30am. He hasn't confirmed yet."
5651,"9:30 am DEPART Private Residence
En route Dirksen Senate Office Building
9:35 am CONFERENCE CALL w/HEARING PREP TEAM
En route Dirksen Senate Office Building
9:45 am ARRIVE Dirksen Senate Office Building
10:00 am TESTIMONY BEFORE SENATE FOREIGN RELATIONS
1:00 pm (t) CMTE ON THE NEW START TREATY w/DEFENSE w/ SEC'Y
GATES AND JCS CHMN MULLEN 106 Dirksen Senate Office Building
1:00 pm (t) DEPART Dirksen Senate Office Building
En route State Department
1:15 pm (t) ARRIVE State Department
1:15 pm OFFICE TIME
2:15 pm Secretary's Office
2:15 pm MEETING w/STEVE BOS WORTH, SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE
2:45 pm FOR NORTH KOREA POLICY AND AMB. KIM Secretary's Office
2:45 pm PREP MEETING FOR MEXICAN STATE VISIT
3:30 pm Secretary's Office
3:30 pin MEETING w/FARAH PANDITH, U.S. SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE
4:00 pm TO MUSLIM COMMUNITIES Secretary's Office
4:00 pm MEETING ON U.S-INDIA STRATEGIC DIALOGUE ISSUES
4:30 pm Secretary's Office
4:30 pm OFFICE TIME
6:00 pm Secretary's Office
TBD pm DEPART State Department
En route Private Residence
TBD pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5652,fyi
5654,"Secretary Clinton and Huma!
Hope you're both well. The DVD screener should arrive at Huma's sometime this morning.
I can't wait for to hear what you think of the film and, if you have the time, how we can strengthen themes and sections
to make it a more relevant and effective educational and policy influencing tool. We are currently at various stages of
reaching out or building partnerships with a wide variety of organizations from Facing History and Ourselves to JStreet to
the Marine Corps to the United Nations
(informally) to various think tanks, and human rights organizations.
We have big plans for the film and hope to use it as a platform to foster critical cross-cultural conversations.
And a disclaimer- the film is still a work in progress. We are drastically changing the intro, moving some sections around,
and adding a story about the Marines sending senior Marine Officers to Jordan to negotiate and build partnerships with
Al Anbar's exiled tribal leaders.
I am so excited for you to see it.
Have a safe trip, I hope to see you soon, and all the best,
Love,
Zach
Zachary J. Iscol
The Editorial Project
www.editorialproject.com
www.thewesternfrontmovie.com"
5655,"I'm not sure where you are but jim steinberg needs to talk to you secure asap.
Also, tony blair called back, he's free for next 3 hours.
And pm papandreou called, wants to give you readout from his middle east trip."
5656,"For meeting with Quinn. It meant so much to him and was the perfect capstone of his year with us. See you in Shanghai.
AM"
5657,"Lincoln 145,207 (44.51%)
Halter 138,660 (42.51%)
• Morrison 42,349 (12.98%)
Because neither Lincoln nor Halter got 50%, runoff scheduled for June 8th."
5658,"FYI, from WHA:
Mexican law enforcement officials cannot stop individuals and require proof of migratory status. However, like
SB1070, officials in the course of official ""contact"" (i.e. Traffic stops, investigations, hot pursuit) are authorized
to request proof of migratory status. They do this in practice routinely. Frequently, individuals who cannot
prove legal status are referred to INM (federal CBP-equivalent). In practice, GoM authorities at all levels
engage in exploitative treatment of migrants, primarily Central Americans heading to the US. These abuses
have been well documented by international human rights groups, as well as by multiple documentary and
news media reports."
5659,See WI as context fyi
5665,"GAY COUPLE SENTENCED TO 14 YEARS IN PRISON IN MALAWI(SBU) The court imposed the maximum sentence against
the couple, accusing them of unnatural acts and gross indecency, according to press. Embassy Lilongwe notes the
decision reflects strong sentiment across the country opposing gay rights, adding the information minister stated the
government was pleased with the conviction. (Ops/Embassy Lilongwe telcon, AP)"
5666,Hear hear
5667,"Our schedule is pretty tight on the flight to Elmendorf - but we should be able to find a few minutes for you on the leg to
Tokyo"
5670,So nice
5671,Fyi on the wmd free zone in the me.
5674,"Mitchell's team contacted me to make sure you had received the HBJ readout. I received it yesterday and it should be in
the set of Middle East docs I gave to Huma to give to you when we got off the plane. It should be in your materials.
Apologies for not flagging yesterday when we landed."
5675,"Pulse - automatically updates when you open it. If you look to the left of each name of the news org, you'll initially see a
circle like symbol. That means it's updating.
Oh, actually the problem you are having is that it needs to find WiFi - do you have WiFi in whatever home you're in now?
We just need to set that up once and it will subsequently connect whenever it senses that wifi.
And yes on Monday can spend some quality time."
5676,"Let me ask Justin/Huma
And on Monday I'll set it up so that it has a near permanent Internet feed"
5677,"comments. Sid
I am currently out of the office on official travel and will return on Tuesday, June 1st. If you need immediate assistance,
please call 202-647-9572."
5678,"Looks like there will be a three-way meeting in Turkey tomorrow.
B1
1.4(D)"
5679,Yes. We are already working on that.
5680,"Hmm, she just emailed.
Also, kurt and jeff went to press to talk to them briefly since it was already set up. Jake talked to them about it."
5681,Yes I asked for the same
5682,I saw he put in a call for you.
5683,"Mexico
And there is some Judith McHale component to it because she is going down there to consult on this spreadsheet"
5685,"There's only one way to top tonight's entertainment when we next host the S&ED...
We have one year to train Renee Fleming to simultaneously sing and juggle chainsaws
Let's see them beat THAT"
5686,"I asked State Ops to call Moratinos; they said you had previously asked and they wanted to know which order to call. Do you want to
call him first or do you want me to call and report to you and then you call?"
5687,"Great interview w/ her on cnn or msnbc where she talked about how impt it is to have a strategic and economic
dialogue and how the long term importance is less specific deliverables than increased understanding of why each side
takes the positions it does prduces good results over time --that we've seen that in the past. Given that she is a former
USTR and a Republican, it was a good plug. and you look great on CNN! AM"
5688,"Trust your instincts re what just went on in the small group mtg. On the bus over kurt and jeff were much more
optimistic, so your sense of the overall direction of the mtg was right. Based on the conversation on the bus after the
mtg, I would ask some tough questions and don't be put off. AM"
5689,"Mitchell, George <
Sunday, July 25, 2010 11:16 AM
Re: Here's my personal email
B6
I talked with Frattini again and went over the point a ain. He said he understands and a rees.
He again said he understands and agrees."
5690,"I just got Huma's message about dinner. My blackberry died and I was recharging it so didn't have it with me. I would
have loved to have had dinner with you and Melanne and had a chance to catch up. Our meetings went well this
afternoon.
Hope the rest of the trip goes well. Look forward to seeing you next week. I'm heading down to Mexico on Wednesday
afternoon to work with Carlos on the strategic communications issues.
Safe travels.
Jm"
5692,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, July 25, 2010 11:24 AM
Fw: Update: Jordanian Foreign Minister Judeh has requested to speak with the Secretary
on a secure line"
5693,"Importance: High
Fyi"
5694,"OK, will do. Please let me know results of Ashton call as this will be helpful to know in my calls with other EU FMs."
5695,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJi@state.gov>
Sunday, July 25, 2010 12:21 PM
Fw: GM's conversation with FM Frattini
RELEASE IN
PART
4(B),B1,1.4(D)
Fyi
Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 07/24/2025"
5696,It appears that he wants to raise some sensitive issues with you - so it's hard to do up a specific call sheet.
5697,"on a secure line
Roger."
5698,"B6
RELEASE IN
PART
1.4(B),B1,1.4(D),B6"
5699,"For your reading pleasure on the way home, S/P has been working on a project that I discussed with Jake a while back --
aimed at figuring out where we could do better and above all create more leverage to achieve our goals. The papers are
blunter than anything you would see from the bureaus -- they should not necessarily be read as policy blueprints but
rather as illustrations of alternative strategies. We have made sure that the special assistants have them on the plane. I
will also share the individual papers with the relevant assistant secretaries. We will then be happy to take the project
further if you approve.
You will be happy to know that rain has stopped at the Expo!
AM"
5700,"See below....Nelson to support Don't Ask Don't Tell measure. Spoke with Byrd's people too....they think he is leaning to
support it, but would know for sure later today.
Nelson to back 'Don't ask' repeal
By: Jen DiMascio
May 26, 2010 12:08 PM EDT
Nebraska Sen. Ben Nelson (D) will back repeal of don't ask don't tell, likely putting repeal proponents over the top in
their quest to end the ban on gays serving openly in the military.
""I don't believe that most Nebraskans want to continue a policy that not only encourages but requires people to be
deceptive and to lie. The 'Don't Ask, Don't Tell' policy does just that,"" Nelson said. ""It also encourages suspicion and
senior officers to look the other way. In a military which values honesty and integrity, this policy encourages deceit.""
""I will support the Lieberman compromise because it removes politics from the process. It bases implementation of the
repeal on the Pentagon's review and a determination by our military leaders that repeal is consistent with military
readiness and effectiveness, and that the Pentagon has prepared the necessary regulations to make the changes,"" he
said, adding that he spoke with Defense Secretary Robert Gates about the issue.
""He advised that while he preferred waiting until the study is completed, he can live with this compromise,"" Nelson said.
Given statements made by Sens. Evan Bayh (D-Ind.), Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) and Susan Collins (R-Maine) that they, too, will
vote for repeal, Nebraska's Nelson would be the critical 15th vote required for repeal to be included in the defense
authorization bill.
Their decisions were also made after earlier news this week that both the White House and Gates could live with a
compromise amendment sponsored by Sens. Joe Lieberman (I-Conn.), Carl Levin (D-Mich.) and Rep. Patrick Murphy (D-
Pa.).
""We thank Senator Nelson for his support and are extremely grateful. He and other senators supporting repeal will be
on the right side of history,"" said Joe Solmonese, president of the Human Rights Campaign. ""While Senator Nelson's vote
is critical, no vote will be taken for granted in these final hours before the Senate committee vote."""
5702,I mistakenly wrote in your notes that it was tomorrow — it is of course Thursday.
5704,FYI
5705,"Sorry to bother you, and promise to keep it to a minimum,"
5708,Ok - I am sending huma a revised call grid this afternoon.
5710,Passed 308-114.
5711,"I can do 830pm at your house(or anytime tomorrow)
Cdm"
5712,"RELEASE IN PART
B6
I for one loved that you finally called out the ogrish males on your staff who roll their eyes at womens issues and events
But fyi I'm pretty sure I saw roll their eyes at the very moment that you were obviously referring to them.
They just don't get it"
5713,Tomorrow you and I have office time at 230pm for 45 min
5714,"Ebeling, Betsy
Thursday, May 27, 2010 4:33 PM
H
ole0.bmp
FISA director leaves legacy of collaboration
Breaking down barriers
Wednesday, May 26, 2010
By Tina Calabro, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Pam Panchak/Post-Gazette
FISA Foundation retiring executive director Dee Delaney, left, with the new executive director,
Kristy Trautmann.
To people in the local disability community, Dee Delaney is a household name.
When news came this spring of her intention to retire as executive director of FISA Foundation in
August, one could almost hear a collective gasp. With 14 years at the helm of the small but
influential foundation, Ms. Delaney has had a pronounced and lasting influence on quality of life in
our region.
On behalf of FISA, Ms. Delaney has changed the local landscape not only by funding projects with
far-reaching results, but by bringing people together to craft solutions to longstanding problems and
by becoming personally involved in many of the projects the foundation funds.
She became the first executive director of FISA Foundation when it began in 1996 with proceeds
from the sale of Hannarville Rehabilitation Center, a nonprofit, to HealthSouth, a for-profit
organization.
The new foundation would continue the mission of the Federation of Independent School Alumnae,
an organization that opened a convalescent home for women in 1911 and the Harmarville
Rehabilitation Center in 1954. That mission was to improve the lives of women, girls and people
with disabilities in Western Pennsylvania.
Ms. Delaney, who had been involved with Harmarville since 1980 -- starting as a volunteer and
ending as development director of its foundation -- sought the job of leading FISA. ""I realized the
impact the foundation could have. FISA is not a large foundation, but it's a very focused
foundation,"" she said.
Over the past 14 years, FISA's endowment has grown to more than $38 million. Over $17 million
has been granted to 726 projects in 298 organizations.
A roll call of projects funded by FISA reflects progressive thinking about including of people with
disabilities in all aspects of life, especially access to health care. Programs have become national
models.
Women with disabilities, for example, often encounter barriers in typical healthcare settings.
Standard exam tables and diagnostic equipment were designed for the able-bodied, and medical
staff often struggle to accommodate individuals with special needs. FISA provided the seed money
for the Center for Women with Disabilities at Magee-Womens Hospital of UPMC, one of the first
such clinics in the nation. FISA is involved in the overall issue of improving access to healthcare
for people with disabilities.
Likewise, people with disabilities have difficulty obtaining dental care. A FISA-funded project at
Achieva is creating statewide, systemic solutions. FISA also provided support for the Center for
Patients with Special Needs at Pitt's School of Dental Medicine.
FISA has also taken the lead on training arts and cultural venues how to make events more
accessible and helping places of worship more welcoming
""Dee is a national leader in the field. If there were more people like her, we wouldn't have the
issues we have,"" said Kim Hutchinson, executive director of the Disability Funders Network, based
in Virginia. Ms. Delaney has been a board officer for the group since 2004.
Nancy Murray, president of the ARC of Greater Pittsburgh, said the issues Ms. Delaney has helped
solve are ones that people have been working on for years.
""People talk about strategies, but never move forward to solutions. Dee brings all the stakeholders
together to get to the solutions,"" said Ms. Murray.
""I think Dee has greatly influenced the next generation of nonprofit and philanthropic leaders,
leading by example on the value of true collaboration,"" said Susie Chase, a board member of FISA
and former executive director of Working Order, a FISA grantee.
""With Dee, it is never about her own role, or FISA's role, it is always about unmet needs in the
community and the work that needs to be done. That seems to bring out the best in every partner,
and in everyone who has the privilege of working with her.""
Ms. Chase added that advice and technical assistance Ms. Delaney provided to Working Order
""were of equal or greater value to the organization than the grant funds.""
""I still, after many years, never come away from a meeting with Dee that I haven't learned
something, been inspired to work harder, and understood more clearly the value of someone else's
ideas and efforts.""
In her retirement, Ms. Delaney plans to ""give back to the community in new ways,"" she said. A
new frontier is helping young people with disabilities prepare for employment and leadership. ""We
have to keep the fire burning.""
On May 19, FISA announced that Kristy Trautmaim, who has served as the foundation's program
director for six years, was promoted to executive director.
""We sought a person who would follow Ms. Delaney's visionary leadership and guide the
foundation into the next decade,"" said Jane Burger, who chaired the search committee. ""We know
that we have found such a person in Kristy Trautmaim. She understands the challenges facing the
populations the foundation supports and has the trust of the board and the community."""
5715,"FYI
George Richert
May 25, 2010 6:00 p.m.
A new Buffalo Bill is catching the world's attention.
On the practice field Tuesday afternoon, he was just another Bill, a rookie no less, but he's
catching a lot of attention in his family's homeland.
In China this week, during a speech to dignitaries at the USA Pavilion, Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton said this:
""From Yo-Yo Ma to I.M. Pei to Commerce Secretary Gary Locke and Energy Secretary Chu,
Chinese-Americans have achieved great success in business, government, the arts, sciences and
sports. And to that end, I was pleased to hear that the Buffalo Bills have recently drafted the
first Chinese-American to play in the NFL,"" said Clinton.
Buffalo Bills offensive tackle Ed Wang said, ""It felt good. She's a very important person, and so
for someone like that to talk about me, it just feels good.""
Wang didn't know until he heard from News 4 that he was mentioned in Shanghai. The 6'5"", 250
pound Bills rookie wasn't born in China, but both of his parents were Chinese Olympians in track
and field, so he loves breaking new ground in football.
>»In George's reporter's notebook, he explains why the Buffalo Bills limit media access to the
first 15 minutes of practice
""It is important to me just because I am the first, and I take a lot of pride in being Chinese, but
at the same time, I know that I'm out here to play football,"" said Wang.
Wang is expected to make the team, and his goal is to make a difference."
5716,"FYI — from Morningstar:
The Turkey-Azerbaijan Agreement was not signed last week in spite of both leaders having said that it would be.
Erdogan and Aliyev are now saying June 7 or 8. We have learned that a serious commercial arose that needs to be
resolved. I hope it will be but am making no predictions. One could also speculate that Medvedev's visit to Turkey may
have been a factor. S should be aware of this. Thanks... Dick"
5718,"FYI — the Senate is likely to pass the supp tonight. And, no nominees from any government agency will be
confirmed tonight or tomorrow. Would like to discuss the potential for recess appointments with you and
Cheryl.
The Brookings event, especially your opening remarks, were excellent. Very thoughtful, with lots of real-life
examples. We have gotten lots of positive feedback."
5719,"Getting good feedback on your remarks. The early stories look good, too. More than one person has asked me, did she
do all that off the cuff?
I'll leave Philippe to answer the tax the rich question, but I loved it."
5720,"One could serve till the end of 2011. And if recess appointed, the name stays on the exec calendar and chances are the
individual would still be confirmed the old fashioned way. So there would be no need to be reappointed. The fact is
most people who are recess appointed do get confirmed."
5721,FYI
5722,"Yes Haiti money was in.
Also had a good meeting with corker and isakson. They liked our negotiating record summary, but they don't want to
vote on the treaty in committee next week. Looks like we are headed for september for committee and hopefully floor
action as well."
5724,"Purpose:
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.goy>
Wednesday, July 28, 2010 12:00 PM
H
sheet
RELEASE IN PART B5"
5725,"Ebeling, Betsy
Wednesday, July 28, 2010 12:29 PM
RE:
said: Yeah. Yeah yeah."
5726,I'm not. I'm in new york now. Sorry.
5728,"A few quick items:
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, May 27, 2010 7:34 PM
H
Items
1. Saw you did a conference call with Jim, Tom, and Bill. Bill had called me about the Lavrov call — I don't know
where you ended up, but we thought you might consider
Let me know what you think.
2. You might as
3. Kurt called to say that the Aussie FM wants to speak with you ""for two minutes"" to give you some ""good news
on Afghanistan."" Good news calls are hard to come by, so...
4. I'd like to download two conversations with you tomorrow — first, with
Frank Ricciardone.
second, with"
5729,"Abedin, Hume <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, May 27, 2010 9:56 PM
Fw: Update on Fr. Beirne,"
5731,We'll make sure a rep is there.
5732,"PIR <preines
Thursday, May 27, 2010 11:48 PM
Jake Sullivan
Re: Brookings
Sorry,
just seeing this.
Sanger has a blog item on the NYT site about the comment, but more of a political take in that if you run for president
again your opponents will pull the Brookings tape. And a couple of wingnut blogs asking why you don't just volunteer
more of your own money to taxes, and that you chose Brazil as a ""socialist country that sides with our enemies as a
model."". But frankly, I had to look pretty hard to find that, I was the 19th person to read it. Not 19,000th. 19th.
Most coverage was either straightforward about the NSS, or your comments about the debt as a national security
problem.
But feedback I got was strong, people always always always love you in that format."
5733,"The current revcon document includes a paragraph on North Korea.
How would you like to proceed?"
5734,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence *En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:30 am (t) PHONE CALL w/UN AMBASSADOR SUSAN RICE (T)
10:00 am Secretary's Office
10:00 am BILATERAL w/SRI LANKAN MINISTER OF EXTERNAL
10:30 am AFFAIRS G.L. PEIRIS
10:30 am PRESS PRE-BRIEF
10:35 am Secretary's Office
10:35 am JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/SRI LANKA FM PEIRIS
10:50 am Treaty Room, 7'h Floor
11:00 am MEETING w/QUINN MEACHAM
11:30 am Secretary's Office
11:30 am MEETING w/CONGRESSMEN ELIOT ENGEL AND CONNIE MACK
12:00 pm Secretary's Outer Office
12:00 pm OFFICE TIME
12:30 pm Secretary's Office
12:30 pm MEETING w/SPECIAL ENVOY SCOTT GRATION
1:00 pm Secretary's Office
1:00 pm MEETING w/CONGRESSWOMAN LORETTA SANCHEZ
1:30 pm Secretary's Outer Office
1:30 pm WEEKLY DEVELOPMENT MEETING
2:30 pm Secretary's Outer Office
2:30 pm OFFICE TIME
3:15 pm Secretary's Office
3:30pm MEETING w/DENNIS ROSS
4:15pm Secretarys Office
TBD DEPART State Dept *En Route Private Residence
TBD ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5735,"I defer to Huma on AGOA, happy to follow up on Consular Affairs."
5736,We'll find out.
5737,We can certainly add to your schedule today.
5738,From Bill.
5739,"Marshall, Capricia P <MarshalICP@state.gov>
Friday, May 28, 2010 5:03 PM
H
■"
5740,"RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6"
5741,FYI - will get Rob to write him a note unless you already did one for his own graduation.
5742,"I will be on a plane from 630 til 1245 eastern but easily reachable thereafter.
I recommend"
5744,"Calls confirmed:
Smith @ 8am
Lavrov @ 830am
Miliband @ 9am
Papandraeou originally confirmed"
5746,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, May 29, 2010 9:55 AM
H
is monday better? B6"
5747,"Will do -
X0
Cdm
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, May 29, 2010 10:27 AM
Re: is monday better? B6"
5748,"HRC: Below is an oped on the National Security Strategy I wrote for tomorrow's Outlook.
Unfortunately, they give it a horrible title, but I think the piece turned out alright.
Best, Sandy
By Samuel R. Berger
Samuel R. Berger, chair of the global strategy firm Albright Stonebridge Group, served as national security advisor to
President Clinton from 1997 to 2001.
President Obama's National Security Strategy, released by the White House on Thursday, tackles a delicate but
unavoidable question: How do we respond to new and old security challenges in an era of financial distress at home and
a reordering of political power abroad?
For some time now, it has been clear that the definition of U.S. national security strategy needs rethinking. The
September 11 attacks, global economic crisis, cyber-terror threats and even the environmental catastrophe in the Gulf
underscore that the challenges America faces in 2010 have changed even from just a decade ago. And while America's
military supremacy is certainly not at risk, new international arrangements - such as the shift from the G-7 club of
powerful nations to the G-20, which incorporates emerging nations from China to Brazil - are needed so that the costs
and benefits of a stable international order are shared. The United States cannot solve most global threats without
others, nor should we bear the burden alone.
Enter the National Security Strategy. In my experience, these congressionally mandated documents can easily become
laborious and impenetrable, or mere compendiums of bureaucratic pleading from various parts of the government.
(Make sure you do right by Japan! Don't step on the Pentagon!) The challenge, which President Clinton insisted upon to
me and his other advisers, is to provide a strategic framework that is clarifying to the rest of the world and informs
administration decision makers up and down the line. It's not a blueprint for action, but a means to convey the
president's principles and priorities.
In Obama's case, the new sober and comprehensive 52-page strategy incorporates the new realities and breaks with
past strategies in several key respects. But it also reflects an understanding that we face enduring challenges - nuclear
proliferation, terrorism and regional conflicts - for which the best response is a return to fundamentals.
One such fundamental is the strength of our economy. At a time when the after-effects of a financial crisis and the fiscal
burden of two long wars have raised fears of an overextended America, the administration makes a case for economic
and technological renewal as a crucial underpinning of U.S. security. The president made this case in his West Point
speech last weekend. ""At no time in human history,"" he said, ""has a nation of diminished economic vitality maintained
its military and political primacy.""
Another fundamental challenge is arms control and nuclear proliferation. By seeking strategic arms cuts with Russia, the
president has returned to a long bipartisan tradition that languished during the prior administration. And by convening a
global summit on securing nuclear material this spring, Obama has given new urgency and global purchase to the effort
started in 1991 when Sens. Sam Nunn and Richard Lugar first initiated a program to lock down nuclear materials.
On terrorism, the strategy builds on the past, but breaks with it as well. Presidents Clinton, Bush and Obama each have
deployed all of America's tools: military power, homeland defense, law enforcement, sanctions, intelligence and
vigorous efforts to cut off terrorist financing. But the critical difference in the Obama strategy is that it rejects the Global
War on Terror lens through which the prior administration viewed the challenge. ""This is not a global war against a tactic
- terrorism - or a religion - Islam,"" the new strategy says. ""We are at war with a specific network, al-Qaeda and its
terrorist affiliates.""
This sharper focus avoids alienating many in the Muslim world, ensures the support of key allies who never accepted the
broader construct and avoids the overreactions that led us to forsake the fight against al-Qaeda fight in Afghanistan and
turn our efforts to the unrelated threat from Saddam Hussein's Iraq.
In perhaps the most dramatic departure from the strategy of its predecessor, the Obama administration has restored a
less provocative policy on the use of military force. In the 2002 national security strategy, President Bush articulated the
rationale for preemptive war just weeks before seeking a U.N. resolution to invade Iraq. The new strategy restores the
principles that have guided administrations for decades: the use of force should be a last resort, should weigh all the
costs and benefits, and should have as much international support as possible. The administration reserves the right to
act unilaterally - for example against al-Qaeda and its allies - but resurrects the principle President Clinton often
described as ""together where possible, alone where necessary.""
President Obama's critics have focused on his diplomatic engagement with hostile states like Iran and North Korea. The
President sets forth his rationale: ""to create opportunities to resolve differences, strengthen the international
community's support for our actions, learn about the intentions and nature of closed regimes, and plainly demonstrate
to the public within those nations that their governments are to blame for their isolation.""
In the case of Iran, Washington's outstretched hand has not resulted in Iran's compliance. But attempts to engage have
helped ensure that the world's attention is focused on Iran's intransigence rather than Washington's refusal to
negotiate.
Without a doubt, there are gaps between principle and practice. Despite the Obama administration's stated goal of
doubling exports in the next five years, it has not put its muscle behind trade agreements with South Korea, Panama and
Colombia. And the clarity of its call to respect human rights has at times been muted in the face of tough realities.
Sixteen months into this administration there has been much progress, but many of the true tests of this strategy lie
ahead.
In the strategy's conclusions, the Obama administration evokes an even earlier era, calling for both political parties to
restore the cooperation and common purpose so crucial to our success during the dark days of the Cold War. Despite
the intense debates at the time over nuclear arms control, Central America and détente, nearly all American supported
the containment of communism.
In that same spirit, the administration's framework deserves broad bipartisan support. We can and should argue out our
differences over detention of prisoners, methods to disarm dangerous states, how hard to push for democratic rights, or
the costs of climate change legislation. But at the same time, we can rally around the overriding U.S. foreign policy goals
spelled out in the strategy: renewing our economy at home to ensure leadership abroad; defeating al-Qaeda; succeeding
in Afghanistan; preventing nuclear proliferation; curbing climate change; and promoting an international order of
enlightened self-interest, economic prosperity and the fundamental values upon which America is based."
5749,See below from arturo.
5750,"Things aren't as bad as they seem.
It took a little bit to figure out, but turns out that O'Reilly didn't have a new show last night - in its place they re-aired the
show from May 17th, the original night Posner got beat up. I guess O'Reilly is taking a 4-day weekend, don't ask me why
they picked that show to air in its place. So you were watching a repeat:
http://www.billoreilly.com/show?action=viewTVShow&showID=2612"
5751,"Thanks very much. Will do. Have a good weekend.
Best, Arturo"
5752,I will prepare for you to sign next week. Enjoy the rest of the weekend!
5753,"This is from Fr. Borys Gudziak, the wonderful priest you met in Lviv. He gave you a tour of the Cathedral and you had a
wonderful chat with him at the time. Since then, much progress has been made there. He became head of the new
Ukrainian Catholic University and has really come in to his own as a respected leader and scholar.
Unfortunately, his situation and that of the Catholic community and academic freedom has come under siege since
Yanokovich became president. I have a series of emails from the US Ukrainian community, in addition to this email
directly from Gudziak, They are alarmed about developments. I've been in touch with John Tefft and sent him everything.
He is aware of recent events.
I will make a folder of the correspondence for you since the community here and in Ukraine sees you as their champion.
This is not a good turn of events."
5754,"Importance: High
FYI"
5755,"POLITICO Breaking News:
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has canceled his visit to the White House in the aftermath of the Israeli
military's action against a flotilla seeking access to Gaza, the AP reports. White House spokesman Bill Burton said in
advance of Netanyahu's decision that the White House was currently ""to understand the circumstances surrounding this
tragedy."""
5757,"He called for you. Wants to discuss situation in israel and trip cancellation. Says he's flexible time wise.
Phil gordon and jeff feltman obviously following situation. We don't have a formal talking points yet."
5758,"First observation: Bibi's Entebbe in reverse. The father, Benzion Netanyahu, 100 years old, secretary to Jabotinsky, and
denounced as too radical by Begin, adored his son Yoni, heroically killed at Entebbe. Benyamin has never measured up.
Benzion has constantly criticized him in public for his deviations from the doctrine of Greater Israel. Bibi desperately seeks
his father's approbation and can never equal his dead brother. See Benzion's most recent scathing undermining of his son
Bibi and Bibi's tearful tribute to his brother just last month. The raid on the ship to Gaza resembles the raid on Entebbe,
except that there are no hostages, no guns, it's not in Africa, and it's a fiasco; otherwise, it's Entebbe. (Then, there's Ehud
Barak reliving his youth as a raider killing Palestinians in Lebanon, a feat memorialized in Spielberg's film, Munich.
Ultimately, it didn't work out well that time either. The film captures the moral quandaries, which appear to have escaped
the participants.)
Further observation: The international press will inquire whether the Obama administration gave a wink or nod as the
Bush administration did for the Lebanon and Gaza incursions. Be prepared.
Further: Of course, the consequences for US foreign policy and national security are negative across the board: from the
analogy of the North Korean ship sinking and the Chinese posture to support for Iranian sanctions, etc., etc. Did the
Israelis not hear Petraeus's testimony?
Further: Of course, whatever the outcome of such a raid, one of the inevitable ones would be the death of the peace
process, such as it is, on the very eve of Bibi's scheduled visit to Obama, which would have been, under any
circumstance, in light of the raid, profoundly humiliating for the president. Or are the Israelis bone stupid? I don't think so.
Cheers,
Sid
Like Father, Like Son? Netanyahu's Father Says Son Not
Serious About Two-State Solution.
July 8, 2009 1 Comment
In a controversial interview with Israel's Channel II News, the father of Prime Minister Netanyahu, Professor Benzion
Netanyahu, says that his son does not support a Palestinian state. The elder Netanyahu, claims that the prime Minister
told him he deliberately placed impossible conditions before the Palestinians.
Here are excerpts from the interview. When asked if his son really changed his position concerning a Palestinian state,
the 100 year-old historian unequivocally answered: (translation mine)
""He does not support. He supports such conditions that they (the Arabs) will never accept it. That is what I
heard from him. I didn't propose these conditions, he did. They will never accept these conditions. Not
one of them.""
When asked about his own personal opinion about a Palestinian state, the senior Netanyahu stated:
Herzl and Nordau (fathers of zionist movement) did not labor to create a Palestinian state. This land is
Jewish land and not a land for the Arabs. There is no place here for Arabs, and there wont be a place
here for the Arabs. They will never agree to the conditions.
Published: 04/18/10, 9:03 AM / Last Update: 04/18/10, 9:21 AM
Netanyahu Visits Grave of Brother Who Fell in
Entebbe Rescue
by Tzvi Ben Gedalyahu
Follow Israel news on 4nd
On Saturday night, Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu visited the grave of his brother Yoni, who fell during the daring
rescue of hijacked Israelis in Entebbe, Uganda in 1976.
He and his wife Sarah decided to go to the gravesite on Mount Herzl 24 hours before the beginning of Remembrance Day
for Fallen Soldiers in order to prevent security tie-ups for thousands of other Israelis who will visit the cemetery Sunday
night and Monday.
The Netanyahus were moved emotionally after seeing for the first time a commemorative decoration that the IDF carved
into the gravestone of Yoni, who led the rescue operation and was the only soldier to die in the maneuver. One of his less
known heroic deeds is his saving a soldier from across Syrian lines in the Yom Kippur War in 1973.
Sirens will sound throughout Israel for one minute at 8 p.m. (1 p.m. EDT) Sunday night to mark the beginning of Memorial
Day for 22,682 Fallen Soldiers and 2,431 victims of Arab terrorist attacks following the re-establishment of the State of
Israel after 2,000 years. Another 1,500 civilians were killed between 1860 and the 1948 War for Independence, when
seven Arab nations attacked the fledging, newly declared state just three years after the Holocaust ended.
On Monday morning, a two-minute siren will sound at 11 a.m. (4 a.m. EDT). (IsraelNationalNews.com)"
5759,"Netanyahu pleased: I didn't capitulate
Ben Caspit, Maariv, May 27 2010 [page 2 with front page lead; Hebrew original here and at bottom of post]
In the course of intimate conversations over the past few weeks with top political officials and civil servants, Prime Minister
Binyamin Netanyahu has said, according to his interlocutors, that he managed to defeat the US administration.
Netanyahu is pleased by the fact that the Americans failed, so he said, to twist his arm and that ultimately, in the duel between
him and the Obama administration, he was the one who emerged with the upper hand. We did not make concessions on our red
lines and they failed to make us fold and to drag us to places we didn't want to go, said Netanyahu, according to people who
heard him speak.
Netanyahu is convinced that he is not going to be forced to extend the settlement construction freeze, which is due to expire in
September. According to senior officials in Jerusalem, an agreement has already been reached with the administration that the
Israeli government will not announce an extension of the construction freeze in the territories, and the Americans will ""make
sure"" that the Palestinians do not withdraw from the talks. Israel, however, will not take ""aggressive"" action and construction
will be resumed only in areas that are clearly within the consensus inside the settlement blocs.
The Prime Minister 's Bureau vigorously denied the above report. ""The statements attributed to the prime minister are
incorrect,"" said a spokesman in the Prime Minister's Bureau. ""They were not said by Netanyahu in any forum. The reason is
simple: the prime minister does not think that, Prime Minister Netanyahu holds in great esteem the commitment by President
Obama and the administration to Israel's security and their efforts to renew the peace process in our region.""
Eli Bardenstein adds: The formal invitation that Netanyahu received yesterday to meet with President Obama next week might
attest to a radical change in the White House's attitude towards him. Political sources in Israel described the planned meeting
as ""the peak of the campaign for Israel and the Jews that has been pursued by the Obama administration in the past number of
weeks."" The sources said that the meeting was geared to put an end to the grave crisis that erupted some two months ago
between the Obama administration and Netanyahu over the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and particularly over the continued
construction in East Jerusalem, and to mend the mistaken impression that was received as if Israel was ""no longer an absolute
ally of the United States.""
That crisis, which was initiated by the Americans, elicited fierce criticism in the United States, and sparked a desire among
members of the Obama administration to rectib) the situation. Another reason for the administration's desire to end the crisis
is the fear offailure in the upcoming Congressional elections in November. ""The Democratic Party's coffers are empty.
Many Democrat members of Congress and Senators have complained that if the hazing of Israel were to continue, they
would be unable to obtain donations from Jews and were liable to lose the elections,"" said one source in Washington.
The prevalent assessment is that Netanyahu will be received far more warmly in Washington next week than he was two months
ago. This time the meeting will be covered by the media and the two leaders are expected to have their picture taken together
and to give statements to the media.
That said, sources in Washington noted that ""Netanyahu is leery of the meeting with Obama and of walking into a trap once
again. He knows that the smiles notwithstanding, behind closed doors he is going to have to give answers to very difficult
questions, like 'how do you envision the end of the negotiations with the Palestinians.'""
Netanyahu is to begin his political travels today in Paris, where he is to attend the ceremony in honor of Israel's acceptance
into the OECD. The prime minister will be arriving in a city that is on strike, which is liable to impede his movement through
the city streets to the center of Paris for his meetings."
5760,"Draft statement for use in the Council Chamber, May 31, 2010
Thank you, Mr. President. Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco, thank you for your briefing."
5761,"That is correct. We are set on 6.
Isabelle coming at 7:30 to whitehaven."
5762,"We have a reservation for tonight's 9pm (the last one). I can move to the 8pm if that's what we would like to do.
Lona Valmoro
S ecial Assistant to the Secretary of State
direct)"
5763,Oh sorry. I didn't know you wanted to change to tonite for sure.
5764,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, May 31, 2010 3:52 PM
Fw: Remarks by Ambassador Alejandro Wolff, Deputy Permanent U.S. Representative to
the United Nations, at an Emergency Session of the Security Council, May 31, 2010
FYI"
5765,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, May 31, 2010 4:29 PM
H
Re: Remarks by Ambassador Alejandro Wolff, Deputy Permanent U.S. Representative to
the United Nations, at an Emergency Session of the Security Council, May 31, 2010"
5766,"MS, tomorrow you were scheduled to have a pre-brief prior to the Netanyahu meeting which included Senator Mitchell.
Would you like to still see him (he was scheduled around 12:30pm)?
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
direct)"
5767,"Sounds good, ty.
Lona Valmoro
S • ecial Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
5768,"Yes, it is now at 11:15am. We can do a solid pre-brief at 10:30am with the whole team.
Lona Valmoro
1.1 Si t.ntto the Secretary of State
(direct) B6"
5769,"B5
See below for a summary of Cathy Ashton's conversation w/ Lieberman from her policy planner.
AM"
5770,Many thanks. Will keep you posted.
5771,FYI
5775,What do u think?
5776,"HRC: the email below is fro Love that guy. He wanted to share this news with
you. Kudos!!!!"
5777,Oh yeah
5778,Nothing earth-shaking in the meeting. Better to report by phone than in writing.
5779,Below is a draft statement:
5781,"on monday so we set time for 1:30pm monday
advised i am getting report B6"
5783,I should have left the blackberry in dc...but yes thanks for the reminder!
5785,"FYI
Now one event (WFP and UNICEF — Sheeran and Lake will now be part of our event at UNGA).
cdm"
5786,Fyi - Johnnie's conversation w prez of Ghana.
5787,"Published on The New Republic (http://www.tnr.com)
The Unnecessary Fall
A counter-history of the Obama presidency.
• John B. Judis
• August 12, 2010 I 12:00 am
On April 14, 2009, as Barack Obama's standing in the polls was beginning to slip, and as Tea Party demonstrators were
amassing in Washington for tax day protests, the president gave a lengthy address atGeorgetown University explaining the
""five pillars"" of his economic policies. The speech was intended to promote a memorable slogan for Obama's program that
would evoke comparisons with Theodore Roosevelt's Square Deal, Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal, and Lyndon Johnson's
Great Society.
Obama's contribution was to be the New Foundation. ""We must lay a new foundation for growth and prosperity—a
foundation that will move us from an era of borrow and spend to one where we save and invest,"" he declared. Obama
would repeat the phrase seven times that day and on many more occasions over the next months. At Obama's private
White House dinner with presidential historians that June, the historians were no more impressed than the public with
the New Foundation as a slogan. ""I don't think it's going to work,"" Robert Dallek warned. Doris Kearns Goodwin said it
sounded ""like a woman's girdle.""
One of these historians might have been able to forewarn Obama that the slogan had been unsuccessfully deployed by a
Democratic president once before. In his 1979 State of the Union address, Jimmy Carter began, ""Tonight, I want to
examine in a broad sense the state of our American Union—how we are building a new foundation for a peaceful and a
prosperous world."" Carter would use the phrase five times in the speech, including in its conclusion, where he asked
members of Congress to join him ""in building that new foundation."" Like Obama's effort, the phrase inspired, at most, a
few underwear jokes and was then forgotten.
Obama's evocation of Carter was obviously unintended—but the Man from Plains is indeed the specter now hanging over
his presidency. Of course, Obama has already accomplished more in his first 20 months than Jimmy Carter did during his
entire presidency. But there is a disturbing political resemblance between the two presidencies. Both men ran inspired
campaigns in which they positioned themselves above the scandals and partisan quarrels of their predecessors and
initially stirred hopes of a ""transformational"" presidency. But, as presidents, both men somehow failed to connect with
large parts of the electorate.
To be sure, there are a number of very specific reasons why Carter and Obama landed in political trouble. Both men
contended with rising unemployment—Carter with rampant inflation as well—and voters' approval of a president and his
party tend to track closely with changes in the economy. Carter faced friction in his own party and the rise of a powerful
business lobby, and Obama has dealt with a Republican Party that has frustrated his dreams of a post-partisan presidency.
Yet the most important reason for their difficulties—evident in their inept attempts to brand their programs—has been an
inability to develop a politics that resonates with the public.
In the United States, politics pivots around the allegiance of the middle class, even as its identity has changed from
yeoman farmers and mechanics to store clerks, office workers, x-ray technicians, and small business owners. They are, in
Bill Clinton's words, ""those who work hard and play by the rules."" They are the central characters in a populist rhetoric
that goes back to the early republic. It depicts the middle class as embattled and threatened either from forces below
(impoverished immigrants, welfare cheaters, ghetto rioters) or above (Wall Street speculators, state bureaucrats, K Street
lobbyists). Populism can be embraced by Glenn Beck or Tom Harkin. It is intrinsically neither left-wing nor right-wing.
Politicians, such as Franklin Roosevelt or Ronald Reagan, who found a way of using populism's appeal during downturns
have enjoyed success, while those who have spurned it have suffered accordingly. If, in circumstances like the present one,
you don't develop a populist politics, your adversaries will use populism to define you as an enemy of the people. That's
what Carter discovered during the stagflation of the late '70s. And that's what has happened in the last 20 months of the
Great Recession to Barack Obama and to the Democratic Party he leads.
Obama took office with widespread popular support, even among Republicans, and some of his first efforts, including the
$800 billion stimulus, initially enjoyed strong public favor. But that wide appeal began to dissipate by the late spring of
2009. Disillusion with Obama fueled the November defeat of Democratic gubernatorial candidates in New Jersey and
Virginia. By January 2010, it was a crucial factor in Republican Scott Brown's astonishing victory over Martha Coakley in
Massachusetts.
In the postmortem debate over these defeats, some Democrats have blamed Obama's dogged pursuit of health care reform
while the economy was hemorrhaging jobs. That may have been a factor, but the real damage was done earlier. What
doomed Obama politically was the way he dealt with the financial crisis in the first six months of his presidency. In an
atmosphere primed for a populist backlash, he allowed the right wing to define the terms.
As Obama was delivering his inaugural address, the financial crisis was already in full swing; and it was already apparent
that financial speculation, outright fraud, and irresponsible and sometimes illegal housing-loan practices had played a
very large role in precipitating the crisis. The public was up in arms. But, instead of rallying the public against the ""money
changers,"" as Roosevelt had done in his first inaugural, Obama, taking a leaf from Jimmy Carter's infamous ""malaise""
speech, put the blame on the public as a whole. ""Our economy is badly weakened, a consequence of greed and
irresponsibility on the part of some, but also our collective failure to make hard choices and prepare the nation for a new
age,"" he declared.
Over the next month, Obama would periodically criticize bankers after embarrassing revelations—at various times calling
the bonuses they gave themselves ""shameful"" and an ""outrage""—but, after hearing complaints about his rhetoric from the
bankers, he would back off. At a private meeting on March 28 with 13 Wall Street CEOs, the president, his spokesman
Robert Gibbs said, ""emphasized that Wall Street needs Main Street and Main Street needs Wall Street."" And, in his
Georgetown speech, Obama returned to his theme of collective responsibility. The recession, Obama said, ""was caused by
a perfect storm of irresponsibility and poor decision-making that stretched from Wall Street to Washington to Main
Street.""
Obama's policy followed the same swerving course as his rhetoric. One week, he would favor harsh restrictions on bank
and insurance-company bonuses, but, the next week, he would waver; one week, he would support legislation allowing
bankruptcy judges to reduce the amount that homeowners threatened with foreclosure owed the banks; the next week, he
would fail to protest when bank lobbyists pressured the Senate to kill these provisions. But, more importantly, Obama—in
sharp contrast to Roosevelt in his first months—failed to push Congress to immediately enact new financial regulations or
even to set up a commission to investigate fraud. (When Congress finally appointed a commission in July 2009, Obama
and his party put a milquetoast Democratic politician, former California State Treasurer Philip Angelides, in charge of it.)
Obama's appointments also conveyed an impression that he wanted to let Wall Street off the hook. He appointed Timothy
Geithner to be treasury secretary. Geithner claimed that he was not part of Wall Street, but, in his capacity as president of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, he had served under a board of directors headed by JP Morgan Chase CEO Jamie
Dimon. As New York Fed president, Geithner had been partly responsible for the decision to let Lehman Brothers go
under, for the unpopular tarp program, and for American International Group (MG) paying back its Wall Street creditors
with government money. Geithner chose as his chief of staff a former lobbyist for Goldman Sachs. Retiring Democratic
Senator Byron Dorgan told me, ""Most Americans were reading about the massive compensations and bailouts, and the
administration largely hired people from the culture of Wall Street.""
By the spring, Obama's apparent tilt to Wall Street had sparked a right-wing populist revolt in the country. The newly
formed Tea Party movement, Beck and Fox News, and a host of right-wing bloggers were leading the charge; but, in a less
extreme form, the general public shared their anger. In an early April New York Times/CBS News poll, the public
disapproved of Obama's aiding the banks by 58 percent to 33 percent. In this same poll, public approval of Obama's
handling of the economy began to fall. Pollsters who did focus groups also traced disillusionment with Obama's economic
policies to his handling of the financial crisis.
Congressman Barney Frank, who defends Obama's policies, acknowledges that the president's political difficulties began
with the revelation that MG, which had received $170 billion from the government, had paid out $165 billion in bonuses
to the division that had brought the company down. Geithner had known about the bonuses but insisted there were no
legal grounds to block them. (It then came out that Geithner had pressured Senate Banking Committee Chairman Chris
Dodd to insert a provision in the stimulus bill that protected the bonuses.) ""The pitchforks were out. It added injury to
injury,"" Frank says. That's when public opinion of Geithner plummeted. According to a Rasmussen poll, 24 percent had a
favorable view of Geithner and 44 percent an unfavorable one.
The public's view of the bank bailout and the AIG bonuses colored its view of the auto bailout, the stimulus, and health
care reform. One of the rallying cries for the populist opposition to Obama was ""where's my bailout?"" (Obama himself
acknowledged that it was ""one of the most frequent questions"" he was asked in letters.) The auto program became a
bailout for the Big Three CEOs; the stimulus became a bailout of government itself; and health care reform was a bailout
for the uninsured—or ""reparations,"" as Rush Limbaugh put it. Wrote right-wing blogger Michelle Malkin, ""hardworking
citizens were getting sick of being played for chumps"" by ""moochers, big and small, corporate and individual, trampling
over themselves with their hands out demanding endless bailouts."" Obama and the Democrats were successfully portrayed
as aiding ""the moochers,"" but not the ""hardworking citizens."" In American politics, that's a recipe for political disaster.
Some in the White House political operation recognized in the late spring that the administration's economic efforts were
being defined by right-wing populism and tried to push Obama to take a more populist tack. A group within the White
House began calling themselves the ""pitchfork gang,"" but they would find their attempts to convince Obama to get tough
on Wall Street or on insurance companies undermined by Geithner and by National Economic Council head Larry
Summers, who were worried about upsetting business confidence. ""There was a continual tension in the White House,""
says a person who was privy to the discussions. ""One week, we would be very hot, and then, the next week, we would dial it
back.""
By early January of this year, Obama was clearly losing the battle for the middle class. According to a CNN poll, 60 percent
of Americans thought Obama ""had paid more attention to the problems faced by banks and other financial institutions""
than to the ""problems faced by middle class Americans."" Only 28 percent, barely more than a quarter, thought he had paid
more attention to the middle class. As Brown surged ahead of Coakley in the polls, the White House temporarily embraced
a populist approach. On January 14, Obama called the bank bonuses ""obscene"" and said, ""we want our money back."" In a
January 22 speech at Lorain County Community College in Elyria, Ohio (a far cry from Georgetown), Obama used the
word ""fighting"" 13 times and ""fight"" nine times. ""I will not stop fighting for you,"" he declared.
But, faced with a falling stock market and anger from Wall Street, Obama once again turned conciliatory. On February io,
he said that he didn't ""begrudge"" the $17 million bonus awarded to Dimon and the $9 million to Goldman Sachs CEO
Lloyd Blankfein. ""I know both guys. They are very savvy businessmen.""
Obama's reluctance to rail against Wall Street might have led to a watered-down financial reform bill, or even no bill at all,
but, on April 16, the Securities and Exchange Commission indicted Goldman Sachs for fraud. The next week, an
emboldened Obama went to New York to criticize the bankers directly for their ""failure of responsibility."" As a result of the
indictment and Obama's rediscovery of his anger, Republicans became somewhat less obstructionist, moderate
Republicans broke with the party's leadership, and moderate Democrats fell into line. Congress produced a much stronger
bill than the Democrats had ever expected.
But Obama's embrace of populism has remained fitful and sporadic. After the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and Verizon's
Ivan Seidenberg, the head of the Business Roundtable, criticized Obama for being anti-business in June, the president
dispatched Geithner, White House aide Valerie Jarrett, and Bill Clinton to appease the business community. Obama has
said enough to anger the CEOs, but he has failed to convey to the greater public that he is fighting for them.
Obama's unwillingness to buck Wall Street and the Business Roundtable, along with his delayed and muddled response to
the BP disaster in the Gulf, has eroded the public's confidence in his leadership. In Pew's midyear report card on Obama's
image, the greatest drop from February 2009 to this June was in the perception of Obama as a ""strong leader."" Voters will
sometimes tolerate policies they question from presidents like John Kennedy or Reagan, whom they regard as ""strong,""
but not from politicians like Jimmy Carter, whom they regard as weak.
What of the other factors behind Obama's political difficulties? There is no doubt that, if the economy were growing faster,
and if unemployment were dropping below 9 percent, Obama and the Democrats would be more popular and not fearing a
November rout. But, unfortunately, the economy's sluggish recovery cannot be completely disentangled from the White
House's weak political performance.
In January, when the White House debated how large a stimulus to propose, Christina Romer, the head of the Council of
Economic Advisors, proposed a $1.2 trillion Keynesian jolt. David Obey, the chairman of the House Budget Committee,
told The Fiscal Times that Obama's Treasury Department asked initially for a $1.4 trillion bill. But the administration
finally proposed a stimulus between $700 and $800 billion that included large tax cuts that were more likely to stimulate
saving than consumption—and spending that would be unlikely to produce many jobs until the end of Obama's first term.
In the stimulus's first year, the administration spent only $17 billion of the $139 billion allocated for
infrastructure spending.
Prominent economists, including Paul Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz, made the case that a much larger stimulus was
necessary to reverse (rather than merely reduce) the rise in unemployment, and that, if a modest stimulus failed to reduce
unemployment, Republicans would convince the public that the stimulus was toxic medication and would block additional
Keynesian measures. That argument has been proven sadly correct. Some White House advisers appear to have
underestimated the depth of the Great Recession. Others seem to have doubted the administration had the political clout
to get more from Congress.
But the White House might have gotten more if Obama had proclaimed a national economic emergency (which it was);
framed the issue in terms of rescuing the middle class from damage done by Wall Street speculators, short-sighted CEOs,
and Chinese mercantilism; and directly attacked Republicans as heartless obstructionists. When Obama belatedly made
this sort of case on the eve of the financial reform vote this year, he got a much stronger bill than anyone had anticipated.
So it's not clear that the failure to get a larger stimulus—which has ended up hurting the administration politically—wasn't
itself a result of political timidity.
The president has also suffered from an inability to explain to the public why he sought such a large stimulus and what he
thought it could accomplish. Obama's New Foundation speech at Georgetown was soon forgotten. Afterward, Obama, to
the dismay of Democrats in Congress and some of his White House aides, pretty much dropped the jobs issue. From then
to Labor Day, he devoted a July visit to Buffalo and an August stopover in southern Indiana to the issue—at a time when
the right wing was mobilizing against him. Obama didn't just fail to develop a consistent narrative about the economy; he
didn't really try.
Contrast Obama's attempt to develop a politics to justify his economic program with what Reagan did in 1982. Faced with
steadily rising unemployment, which went from 8.6 percent in January to 10.4 percent in November, Reagan and his
political staff, which included James Baker, Mike Deaver, and Ed Rollins, forged a strategy early that year calling for
voters to ""stay the course"" and blaming the current economic troubles on Democratic profligacy. ""We are clearing away
the economic wreckage that was dumped in our laps,"" Reagan declared. Democrats accused them of playing ""the blame
game,"" but the strategy, followed to the letter by the White House for ten months, worked. The Republicans were
predicted to lose as many as 50 House seats, but they lost only 26 and broke even in the Senate.
Some commentators have noted Reagan's popularity was even lower than Obama's. But, on key economic questions, he
did much better than Obama and the Democrats are currently performing—and voters expressed far greater patience with
Reagan's program. According to polls, even as the unemployment rate climbed, a narrow plurality still expressed
confidence that Reagan's program would help the economy. On the eve of the election, with the unemployment rate at a
postwar high, a New York Times/CBS News poll found that 6o percent of likely voters thought Reagan's economic
program would eventually help the country. That's a sign of a successful political operation. If Obama could command
those numbers, Democrats could seriously limit their losses in November. But Obama has not been able to develop a
narrative that could convince people to trust him and the Democrats.
Why has the White House failed to convince the public that it is fighting effectively on its behalf? The principal culprit is
clearly Barack Obama. He has a strange aversion to confrontational politics. His aversion is strange because he was
schooled in it, working as a community organizer in the 198os, under the tutelage of activists who subscribed to teachings
of the radical Saul Alinsky. But, when Obama departed for Harvard Law School in 1988, he left Alinsky and adversarial
tactics behind.
The young lawyer who returned to Chicago and won a seat in the Illinois state Senate in 1996 practiced a very different
style of politics. Obama's principal accomplishments in Springfield were bills restricting lobbying and requiring
videotaping of confessions in potential death penalty cases. He was not a typical blue-collar, bread-and-butter Chicago
Democrat, but the kind of good government liberal that represents the upscale districts of the city, seeing in politics a
higher calling and ill at ease with (although not in open opposition to) the city's Democratic machine. He was also a post-
racial politician who eschewed the hard-edged, angry rhetoric of Jesse Jackson. (That, too, is oddly reminiscent of Carter,
who partly campaigned in 1976 as the white Southern antidote to George Wallace's angry racial populism.)
Obama carried this outlook into the U.S. Senate, into his campaign for the presidency, and then, into the presidency itself.
He is a cerebral, dispassionate, post-partisan; he wants to ""end the political strategy that has been based on division,"" to
""turn the page"" on the culture wars of the 1960s and the partisan battles of the 1990s. During the campaign, his aides
jokingly referred to him as the ""black Jesus."" While he can tolerate and even brush aside conflict, he is reluctant to actively
foment it. ""In a time of crisis, we can't afford to govern out of anger,"" he declared in February 2009. During his campaign
and his first year in office, he held to a blind faith in bipartisanship, even as the Republicans voted as a bloc against his
legislation. He is, perhaps, ill-suited in these respects for an era of bruising political warfare.
His advisers have clearly reinforced these inclinations. In the campaign, they fashioned him as the outsider candidate of
""hope"" and ""change"" and have extended this strategy into the presidency itself. They see him as standing above party. In a
meeting with congressional leaders last April, senior adviser David Axelrod rejected the complaint that Obama accorded
equal blame to Democrats and Republicans with his descriptions of the ""cynical politics in Washington."" Within the White
House, top aides still speak of promoting the Obama ""brand."" Organizing for America, the administration's campaign
organization, which is supposed to be focusing on the 2010 elections, recently devoted its resources to organizing parties
across the country to celebrate Obama's forty-ninth birthday.
These efforts to elevate Obama above the hurly-burly of Washington politics have been disastrous. Obama's image as an
iconic outsider has become the screen on which Fox News, the Tea Party, radicalright bloggers, and assorted politicians
have projected the image of him as a foreigner, an Islamic radical, and a socialist. He has remained ""the other"" that he
aspired to be during the campaign, but he and his advisers no longer control how that otherness is defined.
The White House and cabinet officials he appointed have reinforced his aversion to populism. As Jonathan Alter recounts
in The Promise: President Obama, Year One, Geithner and Summers repeatedly blocked attempts to get tough on Wall
Street on the grounds that doing so would threaten the recovery itself by upsetting the bankers. For most of his first year,
Alter writes, ""Obama bought the Geithner-Summers argument that the banks were fragile and couldn't be confronted
while they remained in peril."" Its reluctance to come down on the bankers crippled the administration politically, making
it far more difficult for it to get its way with Congress on a second stimulus program that would have boosted the recovery
and Democrats' political prospects. Bad politics can trump good policy.
Populism has profound shortcomings as a worldview. It tends toward demagoguery. In its relentless focus on the middle
class, it can ignore or stigmatize those below it. It can prove hostile to a long-range scientific outlook. A more populist
Obama, for instance, might have postponed the battle for climate change legislation or national health insurance and
probably would have taken a weaker stand on immigration. But populism has been an indelible part of the American
political psyche, and those who are uncomfortable making populist appeals, like Hoover or Carter—or, more recently,
presidential candidate John Kerry—suffer the consequences at the polls.
If Obama's politics leads to a Republican takeover of one or both houses of Congress, and even to a Republican president
in 2012, then much of what Obama has accomplished could be undone. It's unlikely that a new Republican president and
Congress would actually repeal the health care or the financial reform bill. But the former could be starved of public funds
and deprived of regulatory oversight; and the latter could be neutered by a hostile treasury secretary and by weak or
hostile presidential appointees to the Securities and Exchange Commission or the new Consumer Financial Protection
Agency. Reform legislation needs administrations and congresses committed to reform. That is where politics has to come
in; and that's where the Obama administration, with its aversion to populism, has fallen short.
John B. Judis is a senior editor of The New Republic and a visiting scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace.
For more TNR, become a fan on Facebook and follow us on Twitter.
Source URL: http://www.tnr.com/article/politics/magazine/76972/obama-failure-polls-populism-recession-health-
care"
5788,"sbwhoeop
Monday, August 23, 2010 10:22 AM
Re: H: Yes, there is a vast right wing conspiracy. Sid
Or I could send the endless pieces on Obama and his troubles or Haaretz on the new negotiations. I'll skip the torrent of
Obama pieces (see Politico lead piece today, if you want to catch the full updraft of new conventional wisdom), but include
Haaretz below from its editorial editor and Teddy Kollek's former spokesman:
• Home
• Print Edition
• News
• Published 01:58 23.08.10
• Latest update 01:58 23.08.10
ith a victory like this..
The direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians
have preconditions - dictated by Israel.
By At.tiye Elder: Tags: Israel news M:ddist East peace
Two years ago, a basketball tournament was held at Tel Aviv University with the participation of student teams from 14
cOuntries, including a Palestinian team from the occupied territories. The games were purportedly held ""without
preconditions,"" and every team put its best players on the court and aimed to win.
But unsurprisingly, the Shin Ben security service permitted only seven Palestinian players, including bench players, to
enter Israel. Some of the key players on the team were compelled to stay at home. After several losses (by 30 to 40
points), when it was the Palestinians turn to face a team from one of the Israeli colleges, their coach announced that he
had decided to spare his players another humiliation, and requested that the game be canceled.
The illuminating movie ""Friendship Games,"" to be shown tonight on the Yes Docu channel (directed by Ram Levy, along
with Ibtisam IVIara'ana, Duki Dror and Yoav Shamir), documents the tournament, which was the initiative of Ed Peskowitz,
an American Jew and co-owner of the Atlanta Hawks basketball team in the NBA. The camera follows the Israeli coach to
the Palestinian locker room. After a long while, he tells his players that in order to even out the teams, two of them will join
the other side. He tells two of the Israeli bench players, including one known as Fats(); to don the shirts of the Palestinian
team. The game ends with a decisive victory for the Israeli team and a strong sense of missed opportunity..
The direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians, like the basketball game, have preconditions. Not the
conditions demanded by the Palestinians, but conditions dictated by Israel. The refusal to freeze Israeli building in East
Jerusalem is a precondition, just like the demand to freeze it. The refusal to resume negotiations from the point where
talks between the previous prime minister, Ehud Olmert, and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas left off after the
Annapolis conference is no less a precondition than the demand to resume talks from square one.
The head referee, the president of the United States, has twisted the arms of his colleagues in the Quartet and is dragging
Abbas to Washington. Barack °barna decided that the negotiations will be held without any commitment regarding
building in East Jerusalem, and will be opened without even a declaration of principles stating that the talks will be held on
the basis of a general formula, like peace and security for Israel and a state along the 1967 borders for the Palestinians.
It's time to jump into the fountain in Rabin Square and cheer: The Palestinians have been shafted!
If Benjamin Netanyahu's aim is to play around as much as possible with the ball, and sometimes kick the opponent, then
he can really chalk up another victory. But Israel's success in the negotiations, like the success of the student team in the
tournament, is not measured by the terms ""victory"" or ""defeat."" What is victory over a weak Palestinian team worth, if it
was won in friendly games that ended with virtually no interaction between the participants? What is a political process
with the Palestinians worth if it erodes Abbas' standing and leads nowhere?
What have we to gain from humiliating our partner before his constituency on the way to the negotiating table? If Israel's
approach on every one of the core issues is that winning is everything, there's no point in bothering so many VIPs with
another unnecessary summit. Let's assume that we'll succeed, with the help of the Jewish power around Obama, to twist
Abbas' arm some more and extract, for example, an agreement in which he concedes sovereignty over the Temple
Mount. How many hours would such an agreement last?
All we need is a few more ""victories"" like the invitation to the launch of direct negotiations, ""without preconditions,"" and
we'll lose our last partners to a settlement that will prevent Israel from turning into an apartheid state or a Palestinian state
(the binational model is a nightmare, as far as I'm concerned).
What will we do if Abbas announces that he's had enough of losing in purportedly friendly games, and that he's decided
the time has come to step down? Will we declare another victory and invite Hamas leader Khaled Meshal and Iranian
president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to the party?
This story is lojr:
• kiva Eldar
Akiva Eldar is the chief political columnist and an editorial writer for Haaretz. His columns also appear regularly in the
Ha'aretz-Herald Tribune edition. In May 2006 The Financial Times selected him among the most prominent and influential
commentators in the world, ""whose comments inspire callers from across the political spectrum"".
Between 1993 and 1996, Eldar served as the Haaretz U.S. Bureau Chief and Washington correspondent, covering the
peace process, U.S.-Israel relations, American issues and Israel-Diaspora relations. Prior to this, Eldar spent 10 years as
the diplomatic correspondent for Haaretz, as well as its municipal correspondent for Jerusalem from 1978 to 1983. Before
joining Haaretz, Eldar was a reporter and editor for Israel Radio and spent two years as spokesperson for former Mayor of
Jerusalem, Teddy Kollek.
Eldar is the author of several books on Israel and the Middle East, including ""The ambush on Jerusalem"", which deals
with U.S.-Israel-Jewish community relations, and ""Lords of the Land"", an exploration of the Jewish settlements in the West
Bank. In 2007 he received the annual ""Search for Common Ground"" award for Middle East journalism.
Eldar was a special consultant to Abba Eban's PBS television documentaries on the history of Israel and the Oslo peace
initiative. He regularly appears on major television and radio networks in the U.S., Canada, Australia, Europe and Israel.
He appeared many times on news programs such as Nightline, The Lehrer Show, Charlie Rose Show, CNN News and
CBS Morning News, current affair programs on Israeli television, as well as NPR talk shows.
Eldar contributes to the op-ed pages of The New York Times, LA Times, The Philadelphia Inquirer, The International
Herald Tribune and The New York Jewish Week. During his stay in the U.S. Mr. Eldar lectured extensively for the Jewish
community and on campuses throughout the U.S., Canada and Australia. He has also participated in various Israeli-Arab-
European seminars.
Mr. Elder was born in Haifa, Israel in 1945. He is a graduate of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, where he majored in
Economics, Political Science and Psychology."
5789,"No because we have not gotten comments back yet, unless you want to wait to see another version tomorrow.
Sent from my iPhone. Apologies for any typos.
On Aug 23, 2010, at 9:30 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> Should I wait for your next draft then?
>"
5790,"Mario and alonzo both say earlier the better. They think 2pm is ok but they wouldn't go any later than that.
Let's see if the shuttles this am are affected cause of weather. So we can reassess in an hour or 2."
5791,"H: This may be worthless meandering on my part, but if the US unveils its own position in the new negotiations, inevitable
if they are not to collapse, perhaps that position should incorporate at its heart what the Israeli government has already
agreed to in the final status negotiations at Camp David, along, of course, with certain adjustments and amendments to
account for the past ten years in terms of boundaries, etc. This puts the burden on Bibi to repudiate Barak in principles
and details if he pushes back, splitting his coalition, and appearing to be the rejectionist. Also it makes the US seems
utterly reasonable, for the Israelis have already agreed to the core of these positions and arguments cannot be made that
they would undermine security, etc. Furthermore, three-quarters at least of US Jews supported the Camp David peace
effort. S"
5792,"I am traveling overseas and only have sporadic access to my email. If you need immediate assistance, please call State
Department Operations at 202-647-1512 and ask for Joanne Lasczcych who can assist you.
cdm"
5793,"Great. Thx.
Sent from my iPhone. Apologies for any typos.
On Aug 23, 2010, at 10:27 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> I will call you later to discuss.
>"
5794,"Call participants:
Counselor Cheryl Mills
Senator George Mitchell
Mr. Dennis Ross
Mr. Dan Shapiro
Assistant Secretary Jeff Feltman
Deputy Assistant Secretary Jake Wailes
Deputy Special Envoy David Hale
Ms. Huma Abedin"
5795,Don't operate from blank slate or allow Bibi to set the terms. There are already terms.
5796,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence 'En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:30 am MEETING w/ERIC GOOSBY
10:00 am Secretary's Office
10:15 am PHOTOS
10:30 am Secretary's Office *Jared Cohen, Paul Narain (wife:
Julianna Bentes)
10:30 am OFFICE TIME
11:30 pm Secretary's Office
Yale Alumni (Jake,
11:30 am PHONE CALL w/ KENYAN PM RAILA ODINGA
11:40 am Secretary's Office
12:00 pm PHONE CALL w/COLOMBIAN FM MARIA ANGELA HOLGUIN
12:10 pm Secretary's Office
12:15 pm UNGA MEETING
12:45pm Secretary's Outer Office
12:45 pm OFFICE TIME
1:20pm Secretary's Office
1:20 pm (t) DEPART State Department *En route Washington National Airport
1:40 pm (t) ARRIVE Washington National Airport
2:00 pm (t) DEPART Washington National Airport via US Airways Shuttle #2174
En route New York, NY
3:25 pm (t) ARRIVE New York, LaGuardia Airport
3:35 pm (t) DEPART LaGuardia Airport *En route Private Residence
4:25 pm (t) ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5797,"Received. However, I did not get the one you sent to my state e-mail earlier. There must be some problem with the
State e-mail filters. I will be monitoring this e-mail closely.
>"
5798,We haven't heard yet that it will. But we are both monitoring.
5802,"sbwhoeop(
Friday, August 13, 2010 4:31 PM
continuing...
H: When Madeleine first became Secretary of State, I organized a group of people for her to discuss the anniversary of
the Marshall Plan to prepare her for her speech. Some were younger, but most were like etc.
We had a long dinner. It was, I think, fruitful for her. (I recall Greg Craig there, then as head of Policy Planning.) There are
a lot of people not in government who have expertise and judgment that are not being tapped, some of them oun er.
There are of course a number of people who have not been tapped into the administration and wish to be.
for example, is someone I've talked with recently, who very much wants to serve as an ambassador or in
some capacity.) , whom I mentioned, and whose CV I've included
below, is someone who is very knowledgeable, tough minded, has ideas, and is capable, in his 40s. He's the kind of
person who might be considered to succeed Anne-Marie Slaughter. There are others out there: for
example, who you may remember s incredibly
effective, but has been kept out of this administration because as a lawyer he's had to register as a lobbyist. He's one of
many. Really counter-productive to develop such self-undermining rules.
thinks hard about diplomacy, and we've been in conversation about how to develop these ideas
further. I he younger generation is interesting, is worth paying attention to, among them. More to discuss. Sid
/"
5805,"of Rage
1:1
Days of Rage -- The
Noxious
Transformation of
the Conservative
Movement into a
Rabid Fringe
By Max Blumenthal, Nation Books
Posted on August 10, 2010, Printed on
August 17, 2010
http://www.alternet.orgistory/147784/
Editor's Note: The following is
the new epilogue from Max
Blumenthal's book, Republic
Gomorrah, now out in paperback
(Basic/Nation Books, 2009).
""He will tell you
that he wants a
strong authority to
take from him the
crushing
responsibility of
thinking for
himself Since the
Republic is weak,
he is led to break
the law out of love
for obedience. But
is it really strong
authority that he
wishes? In reality
he demands
rigorous order for
others, and for
himself disorder
without
responsibility."" --
Jean-Paul Sartre,
""Anti-Semite and
Jew""
I am not sure when I first detected
the noxious fumes that would
envelop the conservative
movement in the Obama era. It
might have been early on, in
April 2009, when I visited a
series of gun shows in rural
California and Nevada. Perusing
tables piled high with high-
caliber semi-automatic weapons
and chatting with anyone in my
vicinity, I heard urgent warnings
of mass roundups, concentration
camps, and a socialist
government in Washington.
""These people that are purchasing
these guns are people that are
worried about what's going on in
this country,"" a gun dealer told
me outside a show in Reno.
""Good luck Obama,"" a young gun
enthusiast remarked to me. ""We
outnumber him 100 to 1."" At this
time, the Tea Party movement
had not even registered on the
national media's radar.
In September 2009, I led a panel
discussion about this book inside
an auditorium filled with nearly
100 students and faculty at the
University of California-
Riverside. Beside me sat Jonathan
Walton, an African-American
professor of religious studies and
prolific writer, and Mark Takano,
an erudite, openly gay former
Democratic congressional
candidate and local community
college trustee. In the middle of
our discussion, a dozen College
Republicans stormed the front of
the stage with signs denouncing
me as a ""left-wing hack"" while a
hysterical young man leaped from
the crowd, blowing kisses
mockingly at Takano while
heckling Walton as a ""racist.""
Afterward, university police
officers insisted on escorting me
to my ride after the right-wing
heckler attempted to follow me as
he shouted threats.
Who was this stalker? Just a
concerned citizen worried about
taxes? His name was Ryan Sorba
and he was an operative of a
heavily funded national
conservative youth outfit, the
Intercollegiate Studies Institute.
Besides founding dozens of
Republican youth groups across
the country, Sorba has devoted an
exceptional amount of energy to
his interest in homosexuals. His
intellectual output consists of a
tract titled The Born Gay Hoax,
arguing that homosexuality is at
once a curable disease and a
bogus trend manufactured by
academic leftists. Adding to his
credentials, Sorba has a history of
run-ins with the law, he explained
when I called him about the
order.
My encounter with this
aggressive right-wing cadre
seemed a strange, isolated event.
But the hostility turned out to be
symptomatic of the intensifying
campaign to delegitimize
President Obama and his allies in
Congress. The Right's days of
rage were only beginning.
Through his first year in office,
Obama seemed oblivious to the
threat of the far right. He
campaigned against partisanship,
declaring that there were ""no red
states"" and no ""conservative
America."" Apparently, he thought
it was merely a contrivance or
myth that there were people who
rejected science, demonized gays,
assailed minority and women's
rights -- or that they genuinely
believed in what they said.
Speaking of changing
Washington, Obama seemed to
think that the entire history of
politics since the rise of Reagan
and the Right and their strategies
of polarization was not deeply
rooted but a superficial problem
attributable to certain ""divisive""
personalities, easily wiped away
with gestures toward
bipartisanship. His view of the
parties was that they were simply
mirror images sharing
fundamental beliefs but separated
by ""partisans."" The skilled and
devoted community organizer
could bring them together.
Many of his supporters in the
media, often part and parcel of
political wars over the years,
reinforced and amplified his
innocence, proclaiming he was
the one at last who could ""bridge•
the partisan divide."" Andrew
Sullivan, a disaffected
conservative who once called
critics of George W. Bush
policies ""fifth columnists"" but
now fervently supporting Obama,
wrote that the new president was
destined to become ""a liberal
Reagan who can reunite
America."" This optimism
pervaded the Obama White
House as the president and his
aides sought out Republicans
willing to vote for his programs.
After all, why couldn't we all just
get along?
In his autobiographical book The
Audacity of Hope, Obama
highlighted a key component of
his political strategy: ""I serve as a
blank screen on which people of
vastly different political stripes
project their own views."" Once he
was elected, conservatives
concluded that they could reverse
Obama's strength by transforming
him into a human tableau for the
most fearsome images they could
conjure.
Obama's multiracial background
was crucial in cultivating
resentment among the shock
troops. Those who rejected
Obama's legitimacy to serve as
president on the basis of his
background gave birth to the
""Birther"" movement that sought
to challenge his citizenship. The
movement's most visible figure,
and therefore the most eccentric,
was Orly Taitz, a dentist and self-
trained lawyer who had
immigrated from the former
Soviet republican of Moldova to
Israel before settling in the
conservative bastion of Orange
County, California. Convinced by
claims on the far-right Web site
WorldNetDaily that Obama
planned to create a ""civilian
national security force,"" Taitz
told me she ""realized that Obama
was another Stalin--it's a cross
between Stalinist USSR and
Hitler's Germany.""
After becoming transfixed by
online conspiracy theories
claiming Obama's family had
forged his birth certificate in
Hawaii, Taitz snapped into
action. She filed a lawsuit in
November 2008 with California
Secretary of State Debra Bowen
demanding an investigation into
Obama's eligibility to serve as
president. Taitz's plaintiff in the
case was Wiley Drake, an Orange
County radio preacher and former
second vice president of the
Southern Baptist Convention who
once publicly prayed for Obama's
death. While her lawsuit went
nowhere, and subsequent suits
earned her angry rebukes from
judges, Taitz became an instant
media sensation, delivering
heavily accented screeds against
Obama before friendly
interviewers from Sean Haimity
to CNN's Lou Dobbs, who Taitz
called her ""greatest supporter""
and who was eventually fired as
an indirect result of his hosting of
her.
In March 2009, Texas Rep.
Randy Neugebauer signed on to a
Birther bill proposing that future
presidential candidates must
prove their citizenship before
becoming eligible to campaign.
The Birther movement had found
its voice in goverment and made
an indelible impact on the
Republican grassroots. By June
2009, 28 percent of Republican
respondents to a Kos/Research
2000 poll said they thought
Obama wasn't born in the United
States, while 30 percent ""weren't
sure."" ""Obama should be in the
Big House,"" Taitz shrieked to me,
""not the White House!""
When Obama announced health
care reform as the first major
initiative of his administration,
the conservative movement
activated a campaign of
demonization -- transformational
politics -- designed to turn Obama
into the ""Other,"" making him
seem as unfamiliar, and therefore
as threatening, as possible. When
the president urged the Congress
to deliver a health care reform bill
in 2009, the Right staged a living
theater of political hatred,
Obama's dream of bipartisanship
transformed into a nightmarish
version of ""Marat/Sade."" On
September 12, 2009, tens of
thousands of far-right activists
belonging to a loose
confederation of anti-government
groups called the Tea Party
Patriots converged on
Washington's National Mall for a
giant protest against the Obama
health care plan. The date was
significant: Fox News's top-
ranked talk show host Glenn
Beck had declared the birth of the
""9-12 Project"" to restore the sense
of unity -- and siege mentality --
that Americans experienced on
September 11, 2001. But this
time, Obama -- not Osama -- was
the enemy.
While covering the rally, I
witnessed sign after sign
declaring Obama a greater danger
to America's security than al-
Qaida; demonstrators held images
that juxtaposed Obama's face
with images of evildoers from
Hitler to Pol Pot to Bin Laden;
others carried signs questioning
Obama's status as a U.S. citizen.
""We can fight al-Qaida, we can't
kill Obama,"" said an aging
demonstrator. Another told me,
""Obama is the biggest Nazi in the
world,"" pointing to placards he
had fashioned depicting Obama
and House Majority Leader
Nancy Pelosi in SS outfits.
According to another activist,
Obama's agenda was similar to
Hitler's: ""Hitler took over the
banking industry, did he not? And
Hitler had his own personal secret
service police. [The community-
organizing group] ACORN is an
extension of that.""
The seemingly incongruous Tea
Party propaganda recalled signs
waved by right-wing Jewish
settlers during rallies against
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak
Rabin and his support of the
peace process, portraying him as
an SS officer and as the French
collaborator Marshall Petain. In
1995, amid the provocative
atmosphere, a young right-wing
Jewish zealot assassinated Rabin.
The Israeli tragedy was a
cautionary example of targeted
hatred leading to violence.
Members of the Tea Party
""Patriots"" did not seem to care
that their rhetoric was irrational,
or that comparing Obama to
Hitler and Stalin was
contradictory and obviously
hyperbolic. Their motives were
entirely negative. By purging
government of the multicultural
evil that had seized power
through illicit means (several
activists told me they believed
ACORN helped Obama steal the
election), they were convinced
that a mythical golden American
yesteryear would return. They
had no interest in building
anything new or even articulating
an agenda, much less discussing
the merits of policies. The Tea
Party's primary concern was
cultural purification -- freedom
from, not freedom to. Against the
dark image of the president and
his liberal allies, Tea Party
activists defined themselves as
the children of light. The racial
subtext was always transparent.
The Tea Party's strategy rested on
a guerrilla campaign of chaos and
sabotage designed not only to
intimidate Democrats but also to
disorient independent voters who
might have supported health care
reform. The Tea Partiers were
convinced this would be an easy
feat, since they believed the
majority of the country was on
their side -- that they represented
the ""Real America."" At the 9-12
rally Matt Kibbe, one of the
march organizers, told the crowd
that ABC News was reporting
that 1 million to 1.5 million
people were in attendance,
something ABC denied, saying
""ABCNews.com reported an
approximate figure of 60,000 to
70,000 protesters."" Then Armey
led the crowd in a chant of
""Freedom works! Freedom
works!"" Unknown to most of the
Tea Partiers, they were intoning
the name of a corporate-funded
Beltway advocacy group, not the
battle cry of Mel Gibson William
Wallace in Braveheart.
Contrary to its image as a
grassroots movement mobilized
to stifle the machinations of
Washington elites, the Tea Party
movement was the creation of a
constellation of industry-funded
conservative groups with close
Republican ties. The movement's
leading puppet-master was Dick
Armey, who directed resources
and talking points to the Tea
Party ""Patriots"" from his
Washington, D.C.-based
advocacy group, FreedomWorks.
Among the corporate clients of
Armey's lobbying firm, which he
was forced to leave as a result of
his involvement in the Tea
Parties, was the pharmaceutical
giant Bristol Myers Squibb, a
company with a clear interest in
defeating health care reform.
(Armey's other ""real American""
clients included the Marxist terror
cult, People's Mojahedin of Iran,
which received funding and
assistance from Saddam Hussein
in order to launch terrorist strikes
throughout the 1990's against
Iranian civilian targets.) Armey
collected a consulting fee of
$250,000 directly from
FreedomWorks and $300,000
from allied astroturf front groups.
FreedomWorks paid out much of
its money to an assortment of
Republican political consultants.
If Armey was the Tea Party king,
Sarah PalM was eager to be
crowned the Tea Party queen.
Just days after Obama's
inauguration, Palin abruptly quit
her job as Alaskan governor to
vie for the honor. PalM's motives
for quitting became clear when
she inked a lucrative deal to write
her political memoir Going
Rogue, signed on as a regular
contributor to Fox News, and
received $1 million an episode for
a reality show on cable television,
""Sarah Palin's Alaska."" PalM's
book tour, which sent her through
Middle America in a luxuriously
outfitted bus, resembled both a
presidential campaign and a
traveling carnival.
Whether or not PalM intends to
run for president, her growing
media presence has magnified her
influence within the Republican
Party. Yet the ever-expanding
Palin phenomenon was greeted
with hostility by Republican
politicos desperately seeking to
expand the party's base after the
drubbing in 2008. Former
McCain campaign manager Steve
Schmidt warned that Palin's
nomination in 2012 would be
""catastrophic"" for the GOP. His
doomsday prediction was backed
by an October Gallup poll
revealing her as one of the most
polarizing and unpopular political
figures in the country with a
disapproval rating of over 50
percent. Unfortunately for
Schmidt and other party
pragmatists, those who approve
of Palin represent the heartbeat of
the Republican Party, its most
fervent activists, and cannot be
dissuaded from following her,
even if she is leading the party off
a cliff.
A November 2009 special
congressional election in New
York's heavily Republican 23rd
district was the first major test of
Palin's power. Along with a
parade of nationally recognized
conservatives, Palin endorsed
Doug Hoffman, an unknown far-
right third-party candidate closely
allied with the Tea Party, helping
to force a popular moderate
Republican politician, Dede
Scozzafava, from the race. In the
end, Palin's ideological purge in
upstate New York led to an
improbable Democratic victory,
the first in that district in more
than 100 years. After the disaster
Palin and her allies claimed
victory, insisting they had at least
hastened the purge of
ideologically impure Republicans
from the party. She went on to
endorse Rand Paul, the son of
right-wing libertarian Rep. Ron
Paul and a candidate in
Kentucky's GOP senatorial
primary, while Dick Cheney went
out of his way to endorse Rand's
regular Republican opponent,
Trey Grayson, the Kentucky
secretary of state.
Following the Tea Party script of
avoiding social issues like
abortion and gay marriage in
order to obscure the large
presence of the Christian Right
within the movement's ranks, the
self-described ""hardcore pro-
lifer"" Palin recast herself as a
libertarian concerned primarily
with issues of ""economic
freedom."" She claimed the
Democratic ""cap and trade"" plan
to limit carbon emissions would
harm the livelihood of blue-collar
workers, and she assailed health
care reform as a Trojan Horse for
""socialism"" (though she admitted
her family ""used to hustle over
the border"" to take advantage of
Canada's single-payer health care
system). But no Palin attack had
as much effect as the one she
blasted out on her Facebook page
claiming the Obama health care
plan included a provision for
""death panels"" that would
recommend euthanasia for
severely ill patients like her
Down syndrome-afflicted son,
Trig. With the click of a button,
Palin transformed the tone of the
health care debate from rancorous
to poisonous.
The source of Palin's ""death
panels"" smear was a practiced
propagandist, former New York
Lieutenant Governor Betsy
McCaughey. When President Bill
Clinton introduced health care
reform during his first term,
McCaughey falsely claimed in an
article published in the New
Republic and widely circulated by
Republicans, that the plan would
force consumers to drop their
private plans and buy into the
government's program (the article
would go on to win a National
Magazine Award and then be
retracted years later by the New
Republic's editors). Now she was
back in the spotlight, pushing a
rumor that would be voted by the
non-partisan fact-checking Web
site Politifact.com as ""the lie of
2009."" McCaughey's latest
innuendo was boosted by the cult
of political crank Lyndon
LaRouche, which mobilized to
push the rumor into the
mainstream.
In June 2009, one of LaRouche's
top lieutenants publicly
confronted Ezekiel Emanuel, the
National Institute of Health's
chief bioethicist and brother of
White House chief of staff Rahm
Emanuel, accusing him of
seeking to reintroduce Hitler's T-
4 program to kill the handicapped
through health care reform.
""President Obama has put in
place a reform apparatus reviving
the euthanasia of Hitler Germany
in 1939, that began the genocide
there,"" LaRouche staffer Anton
Chaitkin charged. Soon,
LaRouche's followers were on
street corners around the country
with posters depicting Obama
with a Hitler moustache. At a
town hall forum on health care
reform hosted by Democratic
Rep. Barney Frank, a LaRouche
follower waved one of the
Obama-as-Hitler posters and
demanded, ""Why do you continue
to support a Nazi policy, as
Obama has expressly supported
this policy?""
Two months later, after Palin
whispered the rumor on
Facebook, prominent
conservatives from former
Speaker of the House Newt
Gingrich to ranking Senate
Finance Committee member
Charles Grassley parroted her
claims before audiences of
indignant Tea Partiers. Not to be
outdone, Glenn Beck devoted an
extended rant on his show to the
reality of death panels. Echoing
the LaRouche cultists, Beck
accused Ezekiel Emanuel of ""the
devaluing of human life, putting a
price on each individual."" He
thundered, ""The death panel is
not a firing squad. Rationing is
inevitable and they know it!""
The death panel rumor served a
variety of functions, all useful to
the movement, but not necessarily
to the Republican Party. Most
importantly, the rumor resonated
both with hard-core libertarians
who resented the very existence
of the federal government and
Christian Right activists who
viewed the legalization of
abortion as a slippery slope to
government-sponsored
euthanasia. The hysteria it
engendered helped repair the rift
exposed by the Terri Schiavo
charade in 2005, when the
evangelical conservative James
Dobson publicly clashed with
Armey, the libertarian leader,
over the right of the government
to interfere in a private family
matter of life and death.
The slurring of Obama as a sort
of sleeper agent crypto-Muslim
helped bring the neoconservatives
back into the fray. The new neo-
con generation was led by Dick
Cheney's daughter, Liz, who
founded an anti-Obama advocacy
group, Keep America Safe, by
leveraging donations from pro-
Israel sources. Asked by CNN's
Larry King about the Birther
movement that was challenging
Obama's status as an American
citizen, Liz Cheney remarked,
""One of the reasons you see
people so concerned about this is
people are uncomfortable with
having for the first time ever, I
think, a president who seems so
reluctant to defend the nation
overseas."" With the libertarians,
Christian Right, and the neo-cons
seated around the same table,
united in resentment of the alien
president, the conservative
movement was whole again.
The experiments in ""Terror
Management Theory"" of Sheldon
Solomon, professor of
psychology at Skidmore College,
Jeff Greenberg, professor of
psychologist at the Unviersity of
Arizona, and Tom Pyszczynski,
professor of psychology at the
University of Colorado, have
demonstrated the connection
between fear of death and
intensification of conservative
attitudes. The findings help
explain the effectiveness of the
death panel rumor and
insinuations by conservative
figures that Obama was not truly
American and somehow
sympathetic to Islamic terrorists.
Indeed, these seemingly irrational
smears were guided by tactical
reasoning, calculated to agitate
voters with constant reminders of
their own mortality. Whether or
not Independents responded, the
rhetoric of death kept the Tea
Party crowd in a persistent state
of panic and rage, ensuring a
standing army ready to fan out to
rallies and town halls at the first
sign of liberal malfeasance.
Obama's first year in office was
marked by more than raucous
protests; there were several
disturbing murders committed by
far-right extremists. In April
2009, a 22-year-old neo-Nazi
wannabe named Richard
Poplawsi mowed down a SWAT
team of Pittsburgh cops, killing
three. Poplawski's best friend told
reporters the young killer ""grew
angry recently over fears Obama
would outlaw guns."" Later it was
discovered that Poplawski had
posted a video clip to a neo-Nazi
Web site portraying Fox's Glenn
Beck contemplating the existence
of concentration camps. (After a
characteristically thorough
investigation, Beck conceded
they were not real.) On another
occasion, the killer posted a video
promoting Tea Party rallies. A
month after the Pittsburgh
bloodbath, Scott Roeder, a
supporter of the militant anti-
abortion group Operation Rescue,
shot Dr. George Tiller to death
while he prayed at his church in
Wichita, Kansas. Tiller was
declared fair game by the anti-
abortion movement because of
his role as Kansas's only late-term
abortion provider. During at least
28 episodes of Bill O'Reilly's
""O'Reilly Factor,"" O'Reilly had
referred to Tiller as ""Tiller the
baby killer,"" a criminal guilty of
""Nazi stuff."" ""I wouldn't want to
be [Tiller] if there is a Judgment
Day,"" O'Reilly proclaimed.
In August 2009, a middle-aged
professional named George
Sodini walked into a health club
in suburban Pittsburgh and
gunned down three women. The
mainstream press explained
Sodini's motives away by homing
in on passages in his online
diaries describing his loneliness,
inability to convince women to
have sex with him, and descent
into chronic masturbation. Nearly
every major media outlet omitted
or ignored a long deranged entry
in which Sodini projected his
sexual frustration onto Obama,
whom he seemed to view as a
symbol of black male virility and
predation.
The day after Obama's election
victory, Sodini wrote: ""Good luck
to Obama! He will be successful.
The liberal media LOVES him.
Amerika has chosen The Black
Man. Good! In light of this I got
ideas outside of Obama's plans
for the economy and such. Here it
is: Every black man should get a
young white girl ... Kinda a
reverse indentured servitude
thing. Every daddy know when
he sends his little girl to college,
she be ... real good. I saw it. 'Not
my little girl', daddy says! (Yeah
right!!) Black dudes have thier
[sic] choice of best white??
[ellipses in original].""
In another posting to an anti-
Clinton forum in 1994, during the
height of the Republicans'
Whitewater investigation, Sodini
revealed that he had purchased a
bumper sticker reading, ""Stop
Socialism, Impeach Clinton,""
from a National Review ad. A
year later, Sodini ranted on an
anti-government militia site, ""I
am convinced that more drastic
action is required to bring the
country back to the Constitutional
order that it was 200 years ago. I
don't think any group of political
leaders will achieve this for us.""
Whether or not Sodini's murder
spree was motivated by his
political passions, he was
pathologically death-driven and
fixated on the phantasmagoria of
right-wing imagery. In his final
diary entry, Sodini proclaimed,
""Death lives!""
More than any other media figure
of the Obama era, Glenn Beck
encouraged the campaign of
racial demonization and
conspiracy that consumed the Tea
Party ""Patriots."" During a
broadcast of ""Fox and Friends,""
Beck opined that Obama ""has
exposed himself over and over
and over again as a guy who has a
deep-seated hatred for white
people, or the white culture."" As
evidence, Beck pointed to White
House green-jobs czar Van Jones,
an African American former
community organizer who was
eventually forced to resign as a
direct result of Beck's crusade.
From there, Beck targeted another
black Obama adviser, Valerie
Jarrett, highlighting her ties to
ACORN while upholding her and
Jones as evidence of Obama's
""socialist"" agenda. In another
broadcast, Beck played an audio
clip of unidentified African
Americans referring to ""Obama
money"" as they collected welfare
checks in Detroit. Then he
showed footage of members of a
Kansas City-based youth group
practicing a step show, a
traditional African-American
group dance apparently
unfamiliar enough to Beck and
his transfixed audience that he
felt at liberty to claim the footage
as evidence that ""Obama's SS""
was being trained across inner-
city America.
In September 2009, Beck
relentlessly targeted ACORN, the
Right's new favorite hobgoblin,
admitting that he intended to use
the poor people's advocacy group
to distract his viewers from the
health care debate. ""Trust me,""
Beck said, ""Everybody now says
they're going to be talking about
health care. I don't think so."" (His
statement was reminiscent of
Rush Limbaugh's scandal-
mongering remark during the
early Clinton administration:
""Whitewater is about health
care."") Beck promptly cued up a
series of hidden camera videos
shot by conservative youth
activists James O'Keefe and
Hannah Giles inside ACORN
field offices. In the videos,
O'Keefe baited African-American
staffers into making statements
explaining that Giles, who
claimed she was a prostitute,
could obtain low-income housing.
O'Keefe edited in images of
himself clad in an outlandish
pimp costume to create the
impression that he was dressed
that way during the meetings with
ACORN; however, Giles later
admitted her partner had lied
about wearing his costume to
farther ineriminate ACORN. In
the end. ACORN was exonerated
of all criminal wrongdoing while
in a separate incident O'Keefe
was arrested and charged with a
federal crime after he and several
conservative pals disguised
themselves as telephone
repairmen and attempted to
wiretap phone lines in the office
of Senator Mary 'Landrieu of
Louisiana. Like Ryan Sorba,
O'Keefe and his posse were
movement cadres paid and
directed by well-funded
conservative outfits; O'Keefe had
been trained by the Leadership
Institute, the right-wing youth
Froup that nurtured leadinG, lights
like Jack Abriunoff, Karl Rove,
Ralph Reed, and Jeff Gannon.
While O'Keefe and his buddies
plea-bargained with prosecutors,
Beck basked in his formula for
success. His show earned the
hithest ratings at Fox News,
topping network franchises like
O'Reilly and Sean Hannity. In the
process. Beck's opinions became
firmly implanted in the nervous
systems of Tea Party activists.
""Glenn Beck has taught us
everything we know,"" a
demonstrator at the 9-12 rally told
Me. ""He's opened our eyes to so
much.""
But unlike the right-wing radio
warhorses who helped usher in
Newt Gin<trich's Republican
counter-revolution of 1994, Beck
was not an authentic product of
the movement. When Rush
Limbaugh first began dominating
the AM airwaves, Beck was
mired in the world of mid-level
commercial radio, delivering
corny yarns about lesbians and
celebrity trash in hopes of
becoming the next Howard Stem.
By night, as he has tirelessly
recounted, he medicated his
anxiety with cocaine and alcohol,
destroying his first marriage in
the process. ""We remember
Glenn from the womanizing, the
drinking, the drugs. Everybody
who knew him at the time saw
what a: complete mess he was,"" a
shock jock from Tampa, Florida,
who called himself Bubba the
Love Sponge remarked to me
during a broadcast of his
nationally syndicated show.
Like Dusty Rhodes, the pseudo-
populist demagogue of Elia
Kazan's 1957 film, A Face in the
Crowd. Beck was a self-
destructive drifter Who might
have been crumpled up with a
bottle of Mad Dog 20/20 in an
alleyway or been locked away in
,a prison cell had fame not found
him first. Beck was only able to
stabilize his life when he made
his escape from freedom.,
marrying a conservative Mormon,
converting to her religion, and
transmuting his urge to abuse
drugs into conservative radio
diatribes. When Beck first broke
into television On CNN's
Headline News Channel, he
struggled to articulate a coherent
political world view. If he
distinguished himself from other
big-time conservative .hosts in
any way, he did so through
strained and often snide attempts
at humor, remnants of his failed
radio career. Nevertheless, with
help from his liberal agent,
Matthew Hiltzik, Beck snagged a
primetime slot at Fox News in
early 2009. Around this same
time, Beck began promoting the
work of an arcane Mormon
conspiracy-peddler named W.
Clean Skousen, whom he
described as his political lodestar.
Suddenly, Beck had something
more to offer than irritable mental
gestures.
Thanks to Beck's designation of
Skousen's pseudohistorical tract
The 5000 Year Leap as ""required
reading"" on the Web site of his 9-
12 Project, and his promotion of
the book on his show, the
previously obscure Skousen.
became the Hidden imam of the
Tea Party movement. By the
summer of 2009, Skousen's Leap
was among the top 10 books on
Amazon.com and a fixture on
literature tables at Tea Party
gatherings. It went from selling a
puny couple of thousand copies in
2007 to selling over 200,000
copies in 2009. Just why the book
generated such an instant appeal
is difficult to understand. It is
little more than a slapdash of
quotes from the Founding
Fathers, often taken out of
context and deliberately
oversimplified, to explain why
America is the greatest nation in
history. in the process, Skousen
claims that church and state
separation is un-American, that
""coercive taxation"" is communist,
and that marriage is the
underpinning of a free society.
Benjamin Franklin., who wrote at
length on the merits of ""amours""
with ""old women,"" and who
famously solicited prostitutes and
fathered a son of out of wedlock,
was the ultimate authority
Skousen quoted on the
importance of marriage.
Though Skousen claims the
Founders as the world's foremost
source of eternal wisdom, he
buttressed his points with fringe
sources like the conspiracist
Norman Dodd's screeds about the
Illuminati. According. to Skousen,
Dodd claimed that ""powerful
influences congregating in the
United States"" like the
Rockefellers and the Rothschilds
had forced the United States into
World War I. Skousen published
Dodd's manifestoes in his obscure
journal Freemen's Digest, which
he founded for the express
purpose of propagating
conspiracies.
Skousen's paranoid politics were
an outgrowth of his participation.
in extreme anti-communist
groups during the 1950s. He
boasted of a close friendship with
then-FBI director J. Edgar
Hoover and said he provided him
with research on communist
plots, claims disputed by FBI
historians. (During a recent
interview. Skousen's son, Paul,
told me that contrary to rumors of
Hoover's cross-dressing and
homosexual dalliances, he would
set the top cop up on blind dates
with live women.) Skousen was
fired from his job as Salt Lake
City's police chief for, in the
words of the city's conservative
Mormon mayor, ""conduct[ing]
hi.s office as chief of police in
exactly the same manner in which
the communists operate their
government."" From there,
Skousen sailed off to the far
shores of the Right-peddling
conspiracy tracts like The Naked
Communist-, and earning
condemnation from his beloved
FBI, which accused him in an
internal memo of ""promoting
[his] own anti-communism for
obvious financial purposes.""
Skousen's vocal support for the
far-right John Birch Society's
claim that communists controlled
President Dwight Eisenhower
cost him the support of the
corporate backers who had paid
for his Red-bashing lecture tours.
He went off the radar for several
years, returning during the late
1960s to accuse the Jewish
Rothschild family of secretly
bankrolling everyone from Ho
Chi Minh to the civil rights.
movement. By the late 1970s,
even the Church of Latter Day
Saints distanced itself from
Skousen and his conspiracy
theories. His work fell through
the margins and might have
disappeared entirely had Beck not
revived it, turning The 5000 Year
Leap into the bible of the Tea
Party movement. Journalist
Alexander Zaitchik observed in
his authoritative profile of
Skousen on Salon.com that
Skousen's renewed influence
through Beck and the Tea Party
'suggests that the modern base of
the Republican Party is headed to
a very strange place.""
Besides influencing Beck,
Skousen's teachings inspired one
of the Tea Party movement's most
visible grassroots celebrities,
retired Sheriff Richard Mack. I
met Mack in February at a far-
right rally just outside of
Montgomery, Alabama. On a
makeshift stage towed into the
middle of a rodeo arena by a
pickup truck, Mack recalled with
reverence his mentorship by
Skousen, who he said taught him
everything he needed to know
about the Constitution. Mack
urged his spellbound audience to
stockpile ammo and store food.
""If you control the food supply,""
Mack warned, ""you control the
people. And that's the first step to
slavery.""
Already a hero to conservatives
for successfully suing the Clinton
administration over the provision
in the Brady Handgun Violence
Prevention Act requiring law
enforcement to conduct criminal
background checks of gun
purchasers, Mack reemerged in
the Obama era as the archetypal
local lawman who vowed to resist
the tyrannical federal
government. Along with a few
dozen former and active military
and law enforcement personnel,
Mack helped form a self-styled
Tea Party militia called the
Oathkeepers. Galvanized by their
fear of creeping socialism, the
Oathkeepers solemnly swore to
refuse tyrannical federal orders
such as cooperating with foreign
troops and forcing Americans
into concentration camps.
Because the group's members
trained for combat, the vow came
with suggestion of armed
resistance.
Besides Mack, the Oathkeepers
attracted a coterie of militia
movement retreads into its ranks.
The most well-established figure
was Mike Vanderboegh, a
longtime militia fanatic who
published a booklet in the mid-
1990s entitled Strategy and
Tactics for a Militia Civil War,
calling for sniper attacks on ""war
criminals, secret policemen, rats.""
With Obama in office,
Vandeboegh churned out anti-
government screeds on right-wing
blogs with renewed passion and
supported his efforts by cashing
in the $1,300 in federal disability
compensation he received each
month.
For all the energy the far right
exerted in its campaign to
strangle Obama's agenda, it was a
Democrat who posed the greatest
threat to the passage of health
care reform. Representative Bart
Stupak of Michigan had been in
office since 1993, placing him
among the senior leadership of
the so-called centrist Blue Dog
Democrats. When health care
reform was introduced in
Congress, Stupak became the
leader of an informal caucus of
anti-abortion Democrats, making
him the de facto swing vote on
the House version of the bill. By
extension, Stupak was the point
man in the campaign to ensure
that the bill would not allow
federal funding for abortion for
low-income women.
But after close consultation with
leaders of the U.S. Conference of
Catholic Bishops, Stupak went a
step further. He introduced a
draconian amendment to block
women from paying for abortions
from even their own private
insurance plans. The amendment,
which passed the House but was
shut down in the Senate, became
a key sticking point in health care
negotiations. 'He's a big hero
now in the pro-life community,""
former Bush Catholic issues
adviser Deal Hudson told me in
November 2009. ""Thanks to him,
this is the first time I can
remember the pro-life Democrats
having any power.""
To the chagrin of the
Republicans, Stupak entertained
offers of compromise from the
Democratic leadership.
According to Hudson, the
Catholic Bishops were keen to
see health care reform pass, but
only if the bill contained a clear
provision forbidding patients
from spending federal money on
abortion. Finally, in March, after
pressure from House Majority
Leader Nancy Pelosi, Obam.a
agreed to sign an executive order
forbidding the federal funding of
abortion. Stupak had been
mollified. Now he and his anti-
abortion caucus pledged to
deliver the swing votes the
Democrats needed to pass the
bill. As soon as reports seeped out
declaring the imminent passage
of health care reform, major
right-wing blogs like
RedState.org churned out virulent
denunciations of Stupak, calling
him a traitor and sellout. The blog
comment sections filled up with
dozens of diatribes referring to
Stupak in language previously
reserved for Dr. George Tiller:
""Bart the Baby-Killer.""
On March 20, thousands of Tea
Party activists surrounded the
Capitol's Longworth Building in
expectation of Obama's pep talk
to the House Democrats and the
health care vote. Democratic
Representative john Lewis, a
hero of the civil rights movement,
and Representative Barney Frank,
the first openly gay member of
Congress, passed through the
crowd on their way inside the
Capitol. Thsligger!"" a demonstrator
barked at Lewis. Another called
Frank a ""faggot,"" eliciting
laughter and cheers from nearby
protesters. Meanwhile, as another
African-American Democrat,
Representative Emanuel Cleaver,
ascended the Capitol steps, a
protester who had been screaming
at Lewis and Frank spat on his
face.
With the demonstration carried
on into the night, cries of ""Kill
the bill!'' drifted into calls for
violence. ""I would gladly stand
with any of you men here and
take these fascists down,"" a man
in camouflage battle dress
uniform proclaimed in front of an
amateur videographer, pointing
toward the Capitol. ""You haven't
heard the last of me!""
The next day, Republican
members of Congress emerged
from the Longworth Building to
salute the Tea Partiers. The
demonstrators cheered wildly for
their proxies on the inside.
Finally, after hours of
impassioned speeches on the
House floor, the bill passed. But
the drama was hardly over.
Republican Representative Joe
Pitts, an anti-abortion Catholic
who co-authored Stupak's
original amendment, demanded a
motion to bring it back to the
floor for a vote, a transparent
exercise in grandstanding that
was certain to fail. In response,
Stupak rushed to the podium with
a stinging rebuke to Pitts and the
Republicans. ""The motion to
commit does not support life,""
Stupak declared. ""It is the
Democrats who have stood up....""
Heckling from the Republican
side interrupted his statement. As
Stupak looked around the House
chamber, Rep. Randy
Neugebauer, a right-wing
Republican from Texas who
openly supported the Birther
movement, began shouting at him
from the backbench, ""Baby
killer!"" Other Republicans joined
in, parroting base insults.
While the Republicans sank their
heads in defeat, some more
militant devotees of the Tea Party
movement called for a right-wing
Kristallnacht. ""If you wish to
send a message that Pelosi and
her party cannot fail to hear,
break their windows,""
Vanderboegh of the Oathkeepers
wrote on a far-right blog hours
after the bill passed. ""Break them
NOW. Break them and run to
break again."" Within three days,
windows and doors at Democratic
Party headquarters in New York,
Kansas and Arizona had been
shattered.
Meanwhile, at least 10
Democratic members of Congress
reported receiving death threats.
Images of nooses were faxed to
the offices of Stupak and James
Clyburn, an African-American
congressman from South
Carolina. Representative Anthony
Weiner, an especially vocal
proponent of health care reform,
received a menacing letter filled
with white powder. The brother
of Representative Torn Perriello,
another health care supporter, had
his home gas line deliberately
sabotaged after a local Tea Party
organizer posted his address
online (he had meant to post the
congressman's) and encouraged
activists to ""drop by"" to express
their anger about Perriello's
recent vote. In Tucson, Arizona,
the windows of Democratic
Representative Gabrielle
Giffbrds' office were shattered by
shots from a pellet gun. And a
brick was thrown through the
window of Representative Louise
Slaughter's office in New York as
her voicemail filled with threats
of impending sniper attacks.
After the Passage of the health
care bill, the Tea Party floated
into a gray zone between
authoritarianism and anarchy.
Crusading to restore a holy social
order, they promoted disorder.
Claiming to protect democracy,
they smashed windows of elected
representatives. Warning of death
panels, they called in death
threats. With the atmosphere of
violence thickening, Palin took to
her Twitter account to issue a
battle cry: ""Don't Retreat,
Instead—RELOAD!"" Thus
concluded the first phase of the
Obama era that was to usher in a
peaceable kingdom of
bipartisanship.
Max Blumenthal is the author of
Republican GOmorrah
(Basic/Nation Books, 2009).
Contact him at
ax biumenth f..7,13 000(41vahoo.com.
C 2010 Nation Books All rights
reserved.
View this story online at:
http://www.alternetorgistory/147784/"
5807,"FYI, I am forwarding you a message I just sent to Raj about the article in today's Washington Post.j
He and I agreed to work closely on this issue. I have asked INR to get us some research on the security issue which the
implementing partners frequently raise Note the comment in the
Post about the security situation.
As you know we are moving forward on the broader branding issue and plan to have a team of experts advise us as we
move forward.
I will keep you posted.
jm"
5808,"-- Ambassador Patterson met with Zardari last night and urged him to continue his public engagements on the flooding
crisis. She believes he is getting the message.
-- President Zardari visited flood sites in northwestern Pakistan. He will do so again tomorrow.
Zardari still plans to be out of Pakistan on August 18 in Sochi. We have assurances, though, that this will be a one-day
trip."
5809,Jm
5810,"This is what I got from s/rap:
-- Pakistan has asked the UNGA to convene a special plenary session on Pakistan on August 19 in New York. Zardari will
likely mention this and request the Secretary's participation."
5811,Fyi - this should be good.
5812,Ok
5813,"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivan11@state.gov>
Tuesday, August 24, 2010 9:23 AM
H; McHale, Judith A; Mills, Cheryl D
Lew, Jacob
Re: Billions of aid dollars buy U.S. little goodwill in Pakistan
Adding Cheryl back to chain."
5814,yep
5815,Responding just to you and Cheryl.
5816,Yep - help - that's the point I was trying to make.
5817,Roger.
5818,"Ops says that senator gregg would like to speak with you at 230 pm today. If that time is amenable to you, they will line
up the other senate calls around the same time frame. I'm happy to confirm with them.
###"
5819,Yes I will look into it right away and get back to you asap
5820,"Ops can get cochran at 1100 am. They will attempt to line up the others before noon. If any fall, we can try for the
window tomorrow.
•"
5822,Fyi
5823,"Thanks for the read-out. That's relatively hopeful. I am beginning to think the new OMB Director will need to have a
mini-summit on modernization"
5824,"Great to hear.
I'm also now working on a final round of edits from Jack, Eric, Raj, and others -- also trimming and improving the flow of
the speech a bit. You'll get this revised draft tonight. If you think it is improved, we'll use it, or we can use the draft you
made your changes to, if you'd prefer.
Lissa will be in the office tomorrow to handle your edits.
You will have a teleprompter.
No reason that I know of not to include Zuma; I will add a reference.
Thank you!"
5825,Fyi from Sen Mitchell - he'd like to discuss results of AM meeting with you.
5827,Yes -- last draft I read several hours ago was almost there. Let me check w/ Sonni.
5828,"I have asked INR if there is any research on the security issue to help guide us and I assume we could also reach out to
the IC to get their in-put.
I am working on a note to Denis which I will send to him before I leave for Argentina tonight. I'll copy all of you on it. Let
me know if you want me to run the draft by you before I send it. It will follow the lines of my note to Raj.
jm"
5829,"did kidlet duty all weekend - will call you when you land
On Sun, Aug 15, 2010 at 6:10 PM, H <HDR22@c1intonemai1.com> wrote:
I'm on the way to the 8pm shuttle. Free until then and after thru ops on my bb or at home."
5830,"Madeleine mentioned at Aspen and then called on Friday to remind me that USIP has asked her to spearhead a Track 2
dialogue with Turkey. She thinks it is a good idea; as do I. If you agree, we shd obviously check with Phil and then get
back to Madeleine. AM"
5831,"I'm sorry -- we missed our window today. I shd have insisted we send you the draft we had as of 10 am this morning
rather than Sonni doing another round of edits so that you could have used valuable weekend time. We have a draft we
can send you now, but you should probably see it when you are fresh. Time got away from us; my apologies. AM"
5832,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Sunday, August 15, 2010 10:03 PM
Sullivan, Jacob 1; Mills, Cheryl D
A bilat w/ Cathy Ashton on DC"
5833,"Draft of email I will send to Denis today. Comments ?
DRAFT
Denis:
im"
5834,"Ms: I have an 830 this morning, so rob and monica will be taking care of you until I can make it into the office
around 930.
###"
5835,"This is memo eur put together for us-eu ministerial. We will end trip on 14th so if we did, will be on 14th or before. We
are re-mapping trip. Justin can also print.
NOTE FOR THE SECRETARY
FROM:EUR — Philip H. Gordon
SUBJECT: Proposal for a U.S.-EU Ministerial, October 15, Brussels"
5836,"With the big plane and everyone on it?
Or we stop and switch planes?"
5837,"19th afternoon has been confirmed
Taking a plane is a good idea so u have some flexibility."
5838,"Fyi - Sandy sent the attached thoughts that I think you'll find quite useful. I think you should see/call him when you're
back."
5839,"Will do. I believe we are aiming for early afternoon at the UN, happy to arrange the plane accordingly.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
5840,Will likely start at 3.
5842,"Congratulations on the resumption of direct talks. As evidenced by your activity over the
past several weeks your involvement in the peace process inevitably has deepened as the
need for high-level U.S. intervention has grown. I believe that is a positive result. But
the more fundamental issue remains what your role can and should be going forward in
order to maximize chances of diplomatic success.
I. . State of Play
As the U.S. embarks on the next stage in the Israeli-Palestinian process, it faces a series
of tactical and strategic challenges regarding policy, politics and personality.
1. At a policy level, the meager results of indirect talks and difficulties in transitioning to
direct talks have underscored the lack of trust between the two sides as well as
existing substantive gaps. With direct talks begin in the coming days, one obstacles
will have been removed, but several remain. Some or all of these may have been
resolved in connection with gaining agreement to direct talks.
a. How to handle the renewal or non-renewal of Israel's settlement moratorium?
b. What is the goal of the direct talks and is there a consensus on this matter
between the parties? A comprehensive agreement on permanent (CAPS) that
covers all the details? A framework agreement on permanent status (FAPS)
that outlines the governing parameters, along the lines of the 2000 Clinton
parameters? Or, less ambitiously, a short (one or two page) statement of
principles?
c. What role will the U.S. play? Will George or another U.S. official be present
in all meetings? Will Netanyahu accept that? Is there an argument for
allowing the two sides to deal with one another without any intermediary, at
least for a while, so that they do not seek to play to the U.S.?
d. What will the U.S. do in the event of an impasse or breakdown? Should it
present bridging proposals and, if so, when?
e. How much work should be done, in parallel and simultaneously with the
direct talks, between the U.S. and the Palestinians on the one hand and the
U.S. and Israel on the other?
Beyond those questions, I am persuaded the most important factor is and is likely to
remain what Netanyahu is prepared to do. You have witnessed first-hand how
difficult it can be to deal with the Palestinians and the Arab world more generally;
how fragile is Abbas's political position; how indecisive they can be. Still, at bottom,
we have a relatively clear sense of their positions on the core issues should we ever
reach a moment of truth. That is not the case with Netanyahu who either does not
know himself or is not prepared to share and who, until now, has neither felt the
urgency to reach a deal nor the discomfort of the status quo.
Assuming Bibi can be convinced of the benefits of a deal along lines acceptable to the
Palestinians, this will not occur solely on the basis of his talks with Abbas, whom he
likes but does not truly respect and who he fears will not be in a position to deliver.
Rather, it will happen only if he feels that (1) it is under the leadership of a U.S.
administration he genuinely trusts; (2) he is convinced that the combination of the
agreement and U.S. assurances meets his core needs in terms of Israeli security and
international recognition of its Jewish character; and (3) he feels that, again with U.S.
help, he can sell it to his people and survive -- or even thrive -- politically.
Getting Bibi to accept the core compromises will not be enough, of course. Other
basic elements of the strategy must involve reaching out effectively to the Israeli
public and ensuring strong, vocal Arab support for a U.S.- sponsored deal without
which Abbas cannot say yes and Israelis will lack the incentive to do so. But the
point is that a prerequisite for a successful peace effort is for the U.S. to convince the
prime minister -- through various forms of overt persuasion and implicit pressure -- to
make the necessary compromises. At the end of the day, if Bibi is to make a deal, it
will be a deal with the U.S. as much as with the Palestinians.
2. At a political level, the past year has clearly demonstrated the degree to which the
U.S. has been hamstrung by its low ratings in Israel and among important segments of
the domestic Jewish constituency. This is a critical dimension not for electoral
reasons, but because the U.S.'s best chance of influencing Bibi is to build support for
a deal in Israel and at home among those who care most. That capacity has been
improved to some extent as a result of the successful July visit by Netanyahu and the
string of military/security deals between our two countries. But we must be honest:
there sill is a long way to go. If anything, the recent Obama/Bibi illustrated a new,
potentially perverse dynamic: the U.S. president at this juncture needs the Israeli
prime minister to validate his pro-Israeli credentials more than the Israeli prime
minister needs the U.S. president to vouch for his pro-peace ones.
3. At the level of personalities, George, with all his skill and perseverance, cannot by
himself secure serious concessions from the parties by himself. In recent discussions,
both Israelis and Palestinians described him as someone they respected but to whom
they would not make major concessions. This is the curse of the day-to-day
negotiator. When they are ready to deal, they will only deal with the players they
perceive with authority. It was not different for Dennis during the Clinton
Administration. This does not mean that Mitchell does not have a crucial role going
forward. Indeed, he can be empowered by your more active involvement.
The president faces a different but no less difficult problem. He is not trusted in
Israel and, though the July meeting might have altered the situation somewhat, not
trusted by Bibi. Domestically, he faces a reservoir of skepticism on this issue which
reflects many factors, including inexcusable prejudice, but which could obstruct his
effectiveness both as an interlocutor and as a salesman. Besides, as we learned during
WJC's presidency, it would be a mistake for Obama to get too deeply invested in
negotiations prior to the end-point; he does not have the time and should not expend
the political capital prematurely. To do so, moreover, would automatically be to
devalue the role of anyone beneath him, thus making the peace process as a whole
excessively dependent on his involvement.
Your Role
Under these circumstances, in my view, your deeper involvement is both essential and
potentially highly beneficial. It should be a selective involvement; Mitchell still must be
the day-to-day negotiator and others also must play a part. In particular, I would not
recommend you get overly mired in the details of the direct talks or the set of questions I
described above (about their format, goal, U.S. role, etc) other than at critical junctures.
Nor would I advise you to get pulled into a Christopher-style shuttle diplomacy which
would quickly depreciate your value.
Rather, by injecting yourself strategically at the right time and in the right way, you could
fill the gaps identified above. This is because you are uniquely placed to address the
need both for a higher-level mediator and for someone who enjoys considerable
credibility in Israel and the U.S. (Bibi reportedly told someone recently he was prepared
to deal substantively with Obama and with you).
Your role would be twofold
1. To serve as the higher-level interlocutor on matters offinal status. To a large
degree, Abbas's positions are already known; they will have to be further explored
and he will have to be pushed, and you should engage him. But we probably know
his zone of possible agreement. Not so with Bibi and, I believe, you are ideally suited
to begin a series of in-depth conversations aimed at understanding his key concerns,
how they can be met, what he would need from us and others, and how far, at the end
of the day, he is prepared to go with the Palestinians if his security and other needs
are met. Bibi knows and trusts you; in fact, you are almost certainly the high-level
U.S. official he trusts most. If you succeed in taking him into your confidence and
work with him over time, you could pave the way for an Israeli-U.S. understanding
that would underpin an Israeli-Palestinian agreement. At times, this will require
being tough and pushing back against some of his most extreme demands (the
militarily questionable request for a very long term Israeli presence in the Jordan
Valley being one of them) and proposing more rational alternatives. But the point is
that without getting Bibi to trust and level with us, without him feeling both what he
has to lose but also what he has to gain, this process is unlikely to go anywhere.
To repeat, this should not be at Mitchell's expense. It should be a parallel,
reinforcing process in which you would deal one-on-one with Abbas and Netanyahu
at periodic intervals, for extensive periods of time.
2. To help restore the US. 's image and credibility in Israel and among important
domestic constituencies. You have the history, background and credentials to do so
here and in Israel and thus to overcome some of the suspicion with which Obama
must contend. Over time, through a series of visits and public statements, you would
seek to make the case for a peace agreement in positive terms, focusing on what
benefits it would bring to Israelis rather than on the costs they would incur: secure
and recognized borders; stronger security ties to the U.S. and others; an end to the
conflict; normal relations with the Arab world; and strengthened international
legitimacy.
III. Potential Downsides and Responses
1. Dragging you into the weeds of negotiations. A risk exists that, though repeated
meetings with Bibi and Abbas, you will be drawn into detailed discussions over the
nature of the territorial compromise, the precise security arrangements, etc. This
would be unhelpful both to the process and to you. There is a fine line between
discussing the principles that should guide the final outcome and the precise details of
that outcome, but it will be important not to cross it. Your role should be to extract
from Bibi important understandings and parameters (e.g., security arrangements on
the Jordan valley that minimize infringements on Palestinian sovereignty and
minimize the duration of any residual Israeli presence) and then have your respective
negotiators work out the details
2. Disempowering George. A related danger is to render George powerless by creating
the sense that everything can and should be dealt with through you. Besides
potentially leading him to step down, this outcome would not serve your interests for
the reasons just cited, your effectiveness being a function of your remaining
somewhat removed from the day-to-day specifics of the talks. In fact, as I see it, this
process could and should end up strengthening George's presently hand by clarifying
it. Once you and Bibi will have reached agreement on broad principles, the two of
you will provide instructions to your respective negotiators to find solutions that
reflect them. In that sense, both George and his counterpart will have a stronger and
clearer mandate than currently is the case.
3. Involving you in a failed enterprise. Of all the potential downsides, this is the most
significant one and ought not to be dismissed lightly. Failure is a real possibility.
Palestinians are in disarray. The Arab world is profoundly divided, with forthcoming
successions in Egypt and Saudi Arabia that will weaken two of the states upon which
we most rely. And a serious questionmark hovers over Bibi's politics, his head and
his heart. As a result, a powerful argument could be made that you would be better
off keeping at arms' length from this process, especially given how much else is on
your plate. That said, I disagree for the following reasons:
a. By not getting involved, you risk the worst of two worlds: being associated
with a failure (which, by virtue of your position, you inevitably would be) and
being criticized for not having been engaged in an effort to avert it.
b. Over the past year and a half, you have been involved -- traveling to the
region; seeking to convince Abbas to enter into talks; commenting on the
settlement freeze in Jerusalem -- and you will not be able to escape that kind
of involvement in the future. The problem is that your engagement has
appeared to be sporadic rather than strategic -- that you've been deployed
when it has been deemed necessary to get out of an impasse rather than in
order to implement a long term, well thought-out plan. I do not think that has
served you well.
c. While one cannot by any means be confident of success, I believe an
agreement is possible but that it only has a chance if we can work effectively
to bring Bibi into a position where he believes that the costs of a historical
compromise are outweighed by its benefits.
d. If we don't try all we can over the next year or year and a half, you will in all
likelihood be forced to deal extensively with the Middle East -- albeit not in a
peacemaking but in a crisis-managing mode. Without movement on the
peace process, Abbas could depart, Fayyad's state-building plan could be gone
in smoke, hostilities might break out between Israel, Syria and Hizbollah and
the U.S. would have to deal with Iran in an even less hospitable regional
climate."
5843,"Unfortunately, we just received our first news query on the North Korea consular visit, out of the region. We
are working this issue with EAP but will likely acknowledge the fact when asked at the briefing today.
pJ"
5845,Yes - I would put him and Martin lndyk on the list.
5846,FYI.
5847,FYI.
5848,"PIR <preines
Monday, August 16, 2010 11:48 PM
Huma Abedin; CDM; Jake Sullivan
""minister in a skirt""
http://mobile.nytimes.com/a rticle?a=644869
North Korea Takes to Twitter and YouTube By CHOE SANG-HUN The New York Times August 17, 2010
SEOUL, South Korea - North Korea has taken its propaganda war against South Korea and the United States to a new
frontier: YouTube and Twitter.
In the last month, North Korea has posted a series of video clips on YouTube brimming with satire and vitriol against
leaders in South Korea and the United States.
In one clip, it called Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton a ""minister in a skirt"" and Secretary of Defense Robert M.
Gates a ""war maniac,"" while depicting the South Korean defense minister, Kim Tae-young, as a ""servile dog"" that likes to
be patted by ""its American master.""
Such language used to be standard in North Korea's cold-war-era propaganda. Its revival is testimony to the increased
chill in relations between the Koreas in recent months.
In the past week, North Korea also began operating a Twitter account under the name uriminzok, or ""our nation.""
Both the Twitter and YouTube accounts are owned by a user named ""uriminzokkiri."" The Web site
www.uriminzokkiri.com is run by the Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of Korea, a propaganda agency in
Pyongyang.
Lee Jong-joo, a spokeswoman for the Unification Ministry in Seoul, said, ""It is clear that these accounts carry the same
propaganda as the North's official news media, but we have not been able to find out who operates them.""
The two Koreas agreed to stop their psychological war after their first summit meeting in 2000. But South Korea
resumed propaganda radio broadcasts in May, when it accused the North of torpedoing one of its warships, killing 46
sailors.
North Korea, which denies involvement, has vowed to retaliate. It appears to have found a way with Twitter and
YouTube, with their intended audience clearly South Koreans. (North Korea keeps its people isolated from the outside
world.)
""YouTube and Twitter gave North Korea a high-tech detour for its propaganda,"" said Paik Hak-soon, an analyst at Sjong
Institute. ""But fundamentally, it's not new technology but rather political tension that drives the North to lash out
desperately in the face of mounting international pressure.""
During the cold war era, South Korea punished people caught listening to North Korean broadcasts. Several years ago,
during the brief era of its ""sunshine policy"" of engaging the North, the South allowed its people access to North Korean
Web sites. But today, when a computer user in South Korea clicks on an item on the North Korean Twitter account, a
government warning against ""illegal content"" pops up.
These blocks have triggered criticism here that the Seoul government does not trust its people to form their own
opinions about the totalitarian North.
But the government says the North is using the Internet to spread conspiracy theories about who was behind the sinking
of the South Korean warship, including one claim that an American submarine did so to foster a militant mood in the
South.
The Twitter account, which provides links to the North Korean Web site, had 928 followers as of Monday. But a few
YouTube video clips uploaded by the North commanded thousands of views.
In one such clip, North Korea attacked Yu Myung-hwan, the South Korean foreign minister, who recently criticized ""pro-
North Korean youths"" who voted for the opposition in the June local elections, saying, ""If they like the North so much,
they should go and live under Kim Jong-il.""
The clip's narrator calls Mr. Yu a ""pro-American flunky"" and advised Mr. Yu to earn a living ""mopping the floor of the
Pentagon.""
Another clip claimed that North Korea would prevail in a war with the ""American imperialists"" because it was armed
with nuclear-fusion technology; because of its juche, or ideology of ""self-reliance""; and because of a philosophical
treatise written by Kim II-sung, the North's founding president and the father of Kim Jong-il, who died in 1994.
""I don't think this propaganda from the North will have any significant impact among South Koreans,"" said Yoo Ho-yeol,
an expert on North Korea at Korea University here. ""People watch this for fun, not to be influenced."""
5849,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence
En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:30 am MEETING w/LISSA MUSCATINE
10:00 am Secretary's Office
10:10 am PHOTOS
10:15 am Secretary's Outer Office
10:15 am VIDEOS (6)
10:30 am George Marshall Room, 7th Floor
10:30 am BRIEFING w/STAFF
12:00 pm Secretary's Conference Room
12:00 pm OFFICE TIME
12:30 pm Secretary's Office
12:30 pm OTR LUNCH
2:00 pm Secretary's Outer Office
2:00 pm OFFICE TIME
2:30 pm Secretary's Office
2:30 pm MEETING w/JOSE FERNANDEZ
3:00 pm Secretary's Outer Office
3:00 pm MEETING w/UNGA TEAM
3:30 pm Secretary's Outer Office
3:30 pm OFFICE TIME
6:00 pm Secretary's Office
6:00 pm DEPART State Department
En route Private Residence
6:10 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5850,"Fyi, note I sent to Denis."
5851,"Blago found guilty of lying to the FBI; will be retried on the other 23 counts; jury hung on 27 counts
(4 agst his brother)"
5852,###
5853,"no word from mashabane yet.
Or menendez (though menendez did try my cell while I was on plane) And alexander is available all day tomorrow till
1pm if u want to call."
5854,"I did not. Very aggravating. There is some kind of disconnect. We are still waiting to hear back on mashabane's
availability. Nothing yet scheduled for tomorrow, but we still have menendez and alexander outstanding. Menendez's
staff owes us a call back. Alexander is free up until lpm tomorrow."
5857,I'm sure if she's around. Will ask.
5858,FYI. We are working some of this into the remarks.
5859,FYI
5860,"Well its clearly a state vs outside email issue. State has been trying to figure it out. So lj is getting all your emazils cause
she's on her personal account too."
5861,"Nor do I. Its strange that it seems to be a recent problem with our emails, and there is no rhyme or reason to why some
go through and others don't. In the mean time, ill always confirm for you right away when I receive your emails, even if
an answer is still pending."
5862,"- did u get yu call sheet in pouch. Let me know if u want to schedule.
- alexander available until 1.
- menendez: can talk at 8pm today or tomorrow or thurs after 12pm
- mashabane is traveling in china so no word yet."
5863,"Lissa Muscatine <
Tuesday, August 17, 2010 11:44 PM
Most importantly....
I enjoyed our talk too, but forgot to mention the most important thing of all -- how much I appreciate your bringing me
to State and giving me this opportunity. I have learned so much, meant so many smart and capable people, and hope I
have contributed in some small way to what you are working so hard to accomplish.
I'll write a formal letter for ""the file"" when I leave conveying all of these thoughts„ but I wanted to say something in
person too.
Unfortunately, I got carried away on sports diplomacy and everything else and ....another senior moment!
I'll let you know when I have had a chance to talk to Judith and Ann about the ideas I'm putting together on sports. I do
think there is potential to do much more than is being done now -- and more creatively."
5864,"Has a call into you re: the American Turkish Council.
###"
5865,Ok I will get to work on them right away and let you know.
5866,"I will spare you the details of the computer disaster we suffered, which always happens at critical times, but we lost a
night of work. We are back on draft and will have a draft ready for you to engage much more closely with -- line edits etc
around noon. We will also have to send that version to WH to have any hope of making friday deadline, which is
absolutely hard. We will still b able to make changes in editing process though.
The good news is that I do think the piece is getting better and better, which is also improving the QDDR itself.
AM"
5867,"MS - Bob Einhorn is asking that you hold on the Yu call for now. The Deputy FM is currently in DC. Will meet w/ Einhorn
at 1:00pm. Einhorn will reassess the need for a call after his meeting.
I've reached out to Sen. Alexander's office and am waiting to hear back from them about his availability."
5868,Will do. Still waiting on a call-back from his staff. I asked them if we could do within the next hour (before 11:30 am)
5869,One nice thing out of an otherwise messy trip (elections) ...
5870,"I am currently traveling with intermittent access to email. If you need immediate assistance, please contact Nora Toiv
(toivnf@state.gov) at 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych (Laszczych1@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
If it is an emergency after business hours, please reach out to our Operations Center to have them reach me.
Thank you
cdm"
5871,Tell you in person
5872,Alexander can talk at 10:50 AM this morning (in 20 minutes). I can lock it in for that time and have Ops connect to you.
5873,Ok sounds good
5874,"FYI - Jerusalem mayor causing problem again with sensitive housing plan that could result in further
demolitions/dislocations.
Dan and David have engaged Molho."
5875,"We were aiming for a draft by the end of the day. Part of the problem is that we have also gotten detailed comments
from jack and raj, as well as v good comments from Jake, that sonni is trying to include. Lissa and I will meet as soon as
we get in and see how fast we can get you something. I know you are heading for well-deserved vacation, but cd you still
find some time to review a final draft this weekend? AM"
5876,Will do.
5878,Huma -- Could you print this document. It has the two different openings for the FA piece. Thx. Lissa
5879,Yes. We are trying to re-do the opening per Jake right now. Also adding more granularity.
5880,"sbwhoeop
Wednesday, August 18, 2010 9:18 AM
H: Interesting and relevant contribution to debate on interrelated jobs issue and China policy. Go back to your proposals
on revival of manufacturing sector, too. What is Bill's program on lm jobs you mentioned? If they won't listen, he should
simply do an op-ed. Sid
Does Thomas Friedman Have to Talk to ""Senior Economic Policy Makers"" to Get So
Many Things Wrong?
Dean Baker is co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research in Washington, DC.
Wednesday, 18 August 2010 04:04
Thomas Friedman begins his oiece 1Q(44v by telling readers that: ""over the past few weeks I've had a chance to
speak with senior economic policy makers in America and Germany."" This might lead readers to believe that
he is about to share some great insights that would only be possible for someone with special access to these
senior economic policy makers.
Readers with this expectation will be seriously disappointed. There is nothing here that is more insightful than
what can be found on the Washington Post's editorial pages on an average workday. Friedman rehashes the
usual cliches, with the usual lack of thought. In doing so, he gets both the story of the recent past and the
present seriously wrong.
Starting with the past, he badly misrepresents the prior business cycle:
""we've just ended more than a decade of debt-fueled growth during which we borrowed money from China to
give ourselves a tax cut and more entitlements but did nothing to curtail spending or make long-term
investments in new growth engines.""
The main problem facing the U.S. economy of the last decade was a lack of demand. This was in large part due
to the fact that China lent to us. China's lending was its policy of propping up the value of the dollar in order to
maintain its export market in the United States. (At the start of the decade, the Clinton administration had also
tried to promote an over-valued dollar.) The over-valued -U.S. dollar made imports from China and other
countries very cheap in the United States and made our exports expensive in other countries. This led to a large
and growing trade deficit over most of the business cycle. The trade deficit replaced domestic demand,
preventing the economy from approaching normal levels of employment (even with the boost from the housing
bubble) until just before the crash.
There is no reason whatsoever to believe that China's decision to prop up the dollar was in any way affected by
the Bush tax cuts. In other words, neither the Bush tax cuts nor the growth in entitlements had anything to do
with our borrowing from China. The issue was China's decision to lend and thereby prop up the dollar. Given
the weakness of demand through most of the decade, these expenses could have been easily filled by domestic
production without borrowing from abroad.
Friedman does no better when he shifts the discussion from the past to the present. He refers to businesses'
reluctance to hire as the result of ""unusual uncertainty,"" a phrase attributed to Federal Reserve Board Chairman
Ben Bemanke. Of course there is no reluctance to hire, there is simply a lack of demand for labor. A reluctance
to hire would be reflected in an increasing number of hours per worker, as employers sought to meet their
demand for labor by working the existing workforce more hours.
This is not happening. There is a modest uptick in hours from the low point of the downturn, but the increase
in hours per worker is certainly no more rapid than in other recessions and the average workweek is still far
shorter in just about every sector than it was before the downturn.
Later he tells readers:
""America's solvency inflection point is coinciding with a technological one. Thanks to Internet diffusion, the
rise of cloud computing, social networking and the shift from laptops and desktops to hand-held iPads and
iF'hones, technology is destroying older, less skilled jobs that paid a decent wage at a faster pace than ever
while spinning off more new skilled jobs that pay a decent wage but require more education than ever.""
This is a great story -- social networking is soaring, IPads are everywhere -- does Friedman have any evidence
whatsoever that this development has increased the demand for educated workers and reduced the demand for
less educated workers? If so, this would be the place in his column to present the evidence. Otherwise, readers
might think that the 4.7 percent unemployment rate for college grads (nearly triple the pre-recession level),
coupled with a decline in their real wages over the decade, implies a reduced demand for the labor of highly
educated workers as well as less educated workers.
Friedman's proposed fix also seems a bit wide of the mark. He insists:
""There is only one way to deal with this challenge: more innovation to stimulate new industries and jobs that
can pay workers $40 an hour, coupled with a huge initiative to train more Americans to win these jobs over
their global competitors. There is no other way.""
We better hope there is another way. A wage of $40 an hour would put a worker well over the 90th percentile
on the wage distribution. Even if we double the number of jobs in this pay range -- an incredible
accomplishment -- what happens to the other 80 percent of the workforce?
Friedman then warns us of the challenge from Europe by getting Germany's past and present wrong:
""Keeping up with Germany won't be easy. A decade ago Germany was the 'sick man of Europe.' No more. The
Germans pulled together. Labor gave up wage hikes and allowed businesses to improve competitiveness and
worker flexibility, while the government subsidized firms to keep skilled workers on the job in the downturn.""
Germany clearly has done sorne changes that benefited its economy, like work sharing, and some that haven't,
but its past as the ""sick man of Europe"" is an invention of Friedman or his highly placed sources. Germany
always ran a trade surplus. That is the most basic measure of a country's competitiveness: foreigners are buying
its goods. Germany's unemployment rate in 2.000 ayeravd 7
.,5_percept, not hugely different than its current 7.0
percent rate.
The story here is that Friedman seems to have completely missed the basics of the current economic crisis in
spite of his weeks of conversing with senior economic policy makers. The current crisis is due to a lack of
demand pure and simple. If we generate demand either through more expansionary Fed monetary policy,
greater fiscal stimulus, or increased exports due to a falling dollar, there is no reason to believe that the
economy will not return to high levels of employment. Certainly Friedman has presented no evidence that
increased demand will not generate increased employment as it always has.
The longer term debt problem is overwhelmingly a health care story. Apparently Mr. Friedman's sources don't
have access to documents like the Medicare trustees report, which imply that U.S. health care costs will be
controlled and there will be no serious long-term deficit problem. This may prove -Wrong, but it seems that it
would have at least been worth noting in his column. Of course, if we have not fixed our health care system,
we can always achieve huge saving by retyinq on the more efficient health care systems in other countries.
If Friedman's intention was to scare us, he succeeded. After all, if senior economic policy makers in the U.S.
and Germany are as badly misinformed as Friedman implies, then we can expect some very had times ahead."
5882,"Ebeling, Betsy <
Wednesday, August 18, 2010 12:10 PM
H
RE:"
5886,"I don't want to keep you hanging all evening. I will spare you the excuses; we think we can have
you something by 9:00. In some ways it's getting rougher before it's getting smoother, as we get the
top right and add examples. But it would be very good to have you engage again to make sure we
are going in the right direction. This draft also benefits from extensive comments from Jack, Raj,
and Jake. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
5892,"As you have probably figured out by now, it's not ready. We were prepared to send you something rough, but it's just
not in a state where it makes sense for you to engage. I will call Jim Hoge tomorrow and get another week of need be;
Lissa is going to take over the drafting tomorrow with the aim of getting you a draft by late afternoon that you can really
take some time with; we will then take your comments Friday or Sat (if you need more time) and then not bother you
again until we have a final. I'm sorry, but it is most important that this be good.
AM"
5894,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence
En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am WEEKLY MEETING w/REGIONAL BUREAU SECRETARIES
10:00 am Deputy Secretary's Conference Room
10:00 am OFFICE TIME
10:30 am Secretary's Office
10:30 am TAPED TELEVISION INTERVIEW w/ANVVAR IQBAL, DAWN NEWS
10:40 am Marshall Room
10:45 am TAPED TELEVISION INTERVIEW w/SAMI ABRAHAM, GEO TV
10:55 am Marshall Room
11:00 am OFFICE TIME
11:40 am Secretary's Office
11:45 am DEPART State Department
En route Andrews AFB
12:10 pm ARRIVE Andrews AFB
12:20 pm DEPART Andrews AFB via US Air Force Military Aircraft Tail #70400
En route New York, NY-LaGuardia Airport
1:10 pm ARRIVE New York, New York-LaGuardia Airport
1:20 pm DEPART New York-LaGuardia Airport
En route United Nations
2:00 pm ARRIVE United Nations
2:00 pm MEETING w/FOREIGN MINISTER MEHMOOD QURESHI, PAKISTAN
2:20 pm Room GA-TSC-03C (P5 Meeting Room) *Camera spray at top.
2:40 pm MEETING w/SECRETARY GENERAL BAN KI-MOON
3:00 pm GA-200 (Room directly behind the General Assembly Dias) *Camera spray at
top.
3:00 pm REMARKS AT THE UNITED NATIONS SPECIAL PLENARY SESSION
4:20 pm (t) ON FLOOD RELIEF FOR PAKISTAN General Assembly Hall
4:20 pm (t) DEPART United Nations
En route Private Residence
5:10 pm (t) ARRIVE Private Residence ###"
5895,"Waiting on yu.
Alexander will be pretty soon."
5896,"sbwhoeop
Wednesday, August 25, 2010 10:52 AM
worth reading, even if you know the Intel
B6
H: I'm sure you know the facts in this well-informed piece, how Mullah Omar was saved by ISI, for example, but the idea
of Afghanistan as an aspect of lndo-Pak war is the best and overarching strategic concept. Sid
http://www.newstatesman.com/asia/2010/08/india-pakistan-afghanistan
iNT aLOSE
The military and the mullahs
William Dalrymple
Published 23 August 2010
The Pakistani state has a long history of nurturing jihadis as a means of dominating Afghanistan and undermining India.
It is proving a fatal alliance.
It May have been a nightmarish year for Pakistan but it has been a pretty good one for the country's inscrutable chief of
army staff, the most powerful man in the Land of the Pure, General Ashfaq Parvez Kayani.
For a start, the army's response to the floods has compared well to the usual corrupt incompetence of Pakistan's civilian
politicians, guided by their chateau-hopping president, Asif Ali Zardari (while minister for investment, he was nicknamed
""Mr 10 Per Cent""; he has now been upgraded to ""Mr 110 Per Cent""). This has led to discussion in army circles about
whether it is time to drop the civilian fig leaf and return the country to the loving embrace of its military. So serious is this
threat, that one of the country's most senior and well-connected journalists. Najam Sethi, editor-in-chief of the Friday
Times, went on the record this month to warn that elements in the army were plotting yet another coup.""( know this is
definitely being discussed,"" he said.
Then there was the news that Kayani was going to be allowed to keep his job for a second term: ""an extraordinary
situation requires an extraordinary decision to overcome it"", explained a brigadier, writing in the Nation newspaper.
Kayani, a former head of Pakistan's notorious intelligence agency, the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISO, can now continue
to run the army, and by default Pakistan's foreign policy, until November 2013.
But Kayani's biggest triumph this year, arguably the greatest of his career, was his visit to Kabul in July as the honoured
guest of the Afghan president, Hamid Karzai. The visit marked an important thawing in Pak-Afghan relations, which
have been glacial ever since Karzai came to power in 2001. It also coincided with the sacking of Amrullah Saleh,
Karzai's pro-Indian and rabidly anti-ISI former security chief. Saleh is a tough Tajik who rose to prominence as a
mujahedin protege of Ahmed Shah Massoud, the Indian-backed ""Lion of Panjshir"". The Taliban, and their sponsors in
the ISI, had regarded Saleh as their fiercest opponent, something Saleh was enormously proud of.
When I had dinner with him in Kabul in May, he spoke at length of his frustration with the ineffectiveness of Karzai's
government in taking the fight to the Taliban, and the extent to which the ISI was managing to aid, arm and train its
puppet insurgents in North Waziristan and Balochistan. Saleh's sacking gave notice of an important change of direction
by Karzai. As Bruce Riedel, Barack Obama's Af-Pak adviser, said when the news broke, ""it means that Karzai is already
planning for a post-American Afghanistan"". •
It seems that Kayani and Karzai are discussing some sort of accommodation between the Afghan government and ISI-
sponsored elements in the Taliban, maybe those of Sirajuddin Haqqani, which could give over much of the Pashtun
south to pro-Pakistan Taliban, but preserve Karzai in power in Kabul after the US withdrawal. The expulsion of India,
Pakistan's great regional rival, from Afghanistan, or at least the closing of its four regional consulates, would be a top
priority for the ISI in return for any deal that kept Karzai in power.
With the US toppling of the Taliban after the 11 September 2001 attacks, Pakistan's influence disappeared abruptly from
Afghanistan and
India quickly filled the vacuum. To the ISI's horror, in the early years of this decade, India provided reconstruction
assistance and training worth roughly £835m in total. It also built roads, sanitation projects, the new Afghan parliament
and free medical facilities across the country. It even offered to help train the Afghan army. Nato refused. As General
Stanley McChrystal put it in a report last year, ""while Indian activities largely benefit the Afghan people, increasing Indian
influence in Afghanistan is likely to exacerbate regional tensions and encourage Pakistani countermeasures"".
McChrystal was right. The Pakistanis have always been paranoid about the small Indian presence in Afghanistan. ""We
have strong evidence [that India is] using Afghanistan against Pakistan's interests to destabilise Pakistan,"" a foreign
ministry spokesman claimed in March. Pakistan's military establishment, terrified of the economic superpower emerging
to the south, believes it would be suicide to accept an Indian presence in what it regards as its Afghan backyard - a
potential point of retreat for the army in the event of an Indian invasion, something Pakistani analysts refer to as vital
""strategic depth"".
According to Indian diplomatic sources, there are still fewer than 3,600 Indians in Afghanistan; there are only ten Indian
diplomatic officers, as opposed to nearly 150 in the UK embassy. Yet the horror of being encircled has led the ISI to risk
Pakistan's relationship with its main strategic ally, the US, in order to keep the Taliban in play and its leadership under
ISI patronage in Quetta - a policy Kayani developed while head of the IS!. Karzai's new deal with the Pakistanis, and his
clear intention to try to reach some accommodation with their proxies among the Taliban, therefore represents a major
strategic victory for Kayani and Pakistan's military, as well as a grave diplomatic defeat for India.
Pakistan's support for the Taliban today is only the most recent chapter of an old story of complicity between jihadi
movements and the Pakistani state. Since the days of the anti-Soviet mujahedin, Pakistan's army saw violent Islamic
groups as an ingenious and cost-effective means of both dominating Afghanistan (which they finally achieved with the
retreat of the Soviets in 1987) and bogging down the Hindu-dominated Indian army in Kashmir (which they managed
with great effect from 1990 onwards).
The former ISI director and Dick Dastardly lookalike Hamid Gul, who was largely responsible for developing the strategy,
once said to me: ""If the jihadis go out and contain India, tying down one rnillion men of their army on their own soil, for a
legitimate cause, why should we not support them?"" Next to Gul in his Islamabad living room lay a piece of the Berlin
Wall presented to him by the city's people for ""delivering the first blow"" to the Soviet empire through his use of jihadis in
the 1980s. The WikiLeaks documents suggest he is still busy liaising with jihadis in his ""retirement"".
The Pakistani military top brass were long convinced that they could control the militants they have nurtured. In a taped
conversation between President Pervez Musharraf and Muhammad Aziz Khan, his chief of general staff, that India
released in 1999, Aziz said the army had the jihadis by their ""tooti"" (balls). Yet the Islamists have increasingly followed
their own agendas, sending suicide bombers out against not just Pakistan's religious minorities and political leaders, but
even the IS! headquarters. Nonetheless, many in the army still believe the jihadis are a more practical defence against
Indian hegemony than nuclear weapons. For them, supporting Islamist groups is not an ideological or religious whim, so
much as a practical and patriotic imperative - a vital survival strategy for a Pakistani state.
The army and ISI continued this duplicitous and risky policy after 11 September 2001 despite Musharrafs public
promises to the contrary. The speed with which the US lost interest in Afghanistan after its invasion and embarked on
plans to invade Iraq convinced the Pakistani army that the Washington had no long-term commitment to Karzai's
regime. This led to the generals keeping the Taliban in reserve, to be used to reinstal a pro-Pakistani regime in Kabul
once the American gaze had turned elsewhere.
So it was that the .ISI gave refuge to the leadership of the Taliban after it fled from Afghanistan in 2001. Mullah
Mohammed Omar was kept in an IS! safehouse in Quetta; his militia was lodged in the sprawling suburb of
Pashtunabad. There, Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar presided over the Taliban military committee and war chest.
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the leader of Hizb-e-lslami, was lured back from exile in Iran and allowed to operate freely
outside Peshawar, while Jalaluddin Haqqani, one of the most violent Taliban commanders, was given sanctuary in North
Waziristan. Other groups were despatched to safehouses in Balochistan.
By 2004, the US had filmed Pakistani army trucks delivering Taliban fighters at the Afghan border and recovering them
a few days later; wireless monitoring at the US base at Bagram picked up Taliban commanders arranging with Pakistani
army officers at the border for safe passage as they came in and out of Afghanistan. Western intelligence agencies
concluded that the ISI was running a full training programme for the Afghan Taliban, turning a blind eye as they raised
funds in the Gulf and allowing them to import materiel, mainly via Dubai. By 2005 the Taliban, with covert Pakistani
support, were launching a full-scale assault on Nato troops in Afghanistan and being given covering fire as they returned
to their bases in Pakistan.
At the same time, Taliban attacks on Indian interests in Afghanistan intensified, beginning the process of turning the
Afghan conflict, like that in Kashmir, into what it is today: an lndo-Pak proxy war. The Indian embassy in Kabul was twice
bombed - in July 2008 and October 2009 - as were two city-centre hotels thought to have been used by the Research
and Analysis Wing (Raw), the Indian intelligence agency. Seven Indian civilians and two Indian military officers died in
the blasts.
The degree to which the ISI has been controlling the Afghan Taliban has only just become clear, and not just in the
documents published by WikiLeaks. A report by Matt Waldman of the Carr Centre for Human Rights at Harvard, based
on interviews with ten former senior Taliban commanders, closely documents how the IS! ""orchestrates, sustains and
strongly influences"" the Taliban and shows how the !SI is even represented on the Taliban's supreme leadership
council, the Quetta Shura.
Meanwhile, in the Punjab, Hafiz Mohammad Saeed, founder of Lashkar-e-Toiba, and the man believed to have been
behind the 2008 Bombay attacks, has been allowed to continue operating from Muridke, near Lahore. ""The powerful
western world is terrorising Muslims,"" he told a conference in Islamabad this year. ""We are being invaded, manipulated
and looted. We must fight the evil trio of America, Israel and India. Suicide missions are in accordance with Islam. In
fact, a suicide attack is the best form of jihad.""
At the same time as Pursuing its policy of selectively using jihadis, Pakistan has appeased the US by giving generous
assistance to the CIA in arresting foreign Arab al-Qaeda personnel. A major assault was also launched against both the
militants who took over the Lal Masjid and the ultra-radical Pakistan Taliban who took over the Swat Valley and
announced their intention of turning the country into an Islamic Emirate. In the course of these operations and others in
the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, more than 1,500 Pakistani soldiers and policemen were killed; another 250,000
people were made homeless in the Pak army assault on Bajaur. The IS1 has even been prepared to arrest any members
of the Afghan Taliban who didn't follow orders. Hence the seizure in Karachi, in February, of the Taliban second-in-
command, Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, along with aboutia dozen other senior Taliban whom the ISI regarded as
infringing on their hospitality by opening talks with the Karzai administration via the Saudis, without ISI clearance.
Yet, even though the Pakistani army has conducted major offensives in six of the tribal areas, the seventh, North
Waziristan, has been left alone, as it is home to the ISI's favourite proxies: Haqqani and Hekmatyar. Similarly, Pakistan's
foot-dragging response to the 2008 attacks on Bombay, and the lack of response to the attacks on minority faith groups
in Pakistan over the past few months, show that the Janus-faced policy remains in place. This summer, the chief
minister of the Punjab, Shahbaz Sharif, was quoted heatedly denying that there were any militant groups working in the
Pakistani Punjab, or that the Punjabi Taliban even existed. There are still, in the eyes of many in the Pakistani
establishment, good Taliban and bad Taliban, useful militants and expendable ones.
In their eyes, the ongoing defeat of Nato in Afghanistan, with US and British troops suffering record casualties last
month, is a vindication of its long-term strategy. Islamabad has succeeded in regaining influence in Afghanistan and
Delhi has been checked. But India will not take this lying down. Already the Indian press has reported attempts to -
resuscitate the Northern Alliance as a contingency against the Taliban's takeover of the south, and here India is working
in conjuction with Russia, Iran and the central Asian ""stans"". The Indian national security adviser, Shivshankar Menon,
was despatched to Afghanistan in March, and the foreign minister, S M Krishna, has visited Tehran. Post-American
Afghanistan is looking increasingly likely to be divided between the Tajik, Uzbek and Hazara north and the Pashtun
south, either formally, with a partition, or more likely, to slip into inter-ethnic civil war, with India supporting and arming
the north and Pakistan the south.
As diplomacy gathers pace, the Afghan Taliban, who already control over 70 per cent of the country. continue to
increase their power. The most worrying development has been the spread of Taliban units to the previously peaceful
north, where they have taken over pockets of Pathan settlement around Kunduz and Badakhshan. The death of the
British aid worker Karen Woo on 5 August was a direct result.
In Pakistan. too, jihadi activity is growing. Last year there were 87 suicide attacks across the country, killing roughly
3,000 people and the ISI this week stated that, for the first time in the nation's history, it regarded home-grown Islamic
militants to be a bigger threat to the integrity of the nation than India. Yet the army continues to obsess about India. In a
recent speech, Kayani emphasised that although the army knows the dangers of militancy, it was against Indian attacks
that he was principally focused. At a time when Pakistan's economy is in crisis, electricity supply increasingly erratic and
the educational system in complete breakdown, Kayani has secured a huge increase in the country's defence budget.
It is not a pretty picture: growing violence everywhere, increasing Indo-Pak tensions and a defeat for western interests in
the region. Worst of all, because the Pakistani army regards this as a major triumph, it is unlikely to change its policy any
time soon.
William Dalrymple's ""Nine Lives: in Search of the Sacred in Modern India"" won the first Asia House Literary Award in
May and is newly published in paperback (Bloomsbury, £8.99)"
5898,"Nice work from one of our star PAO's --- Joann Lockard in Kampala
im"
5899,Yes
5900,"Justin printing for you
Talked to einhorn, he doesn't have mtg till 1pm. So if you called, needs to be after meeting. And there will be a new call
sheet."
5901,The girls' team will deliver!
5907,David is interested - we will need to discuss what I add to my discussion with torn re portfolio
5908,"7pm start time
Casual buffet dinner at their house in east hampton Book party for rosanne cash"
5909,"Jim Hoge says that he REALLY would like it by next Wed but can stretch it to next Friday — after
that it's a ""no go."" AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
5910,"This is the proposed statement:
STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
One-Year Anniversary of Release of Abdel Basset Mohamed al-Megrahi"
5911,You've probably heard but they are holding the article for a day at least.
5913,"She's driving and not checking email maybe.
Just called. She thinks 7:15pm is realistic."
5914,Sorry for the delay. Abt 15 minutes away. We hit some traffic in new jersey.
5915,I just got it. CDM now has.
5916,"Also, WashPost has now flipped it's decision and intends to run the piece. RCH will reach out to Hiatt, but it's not clear
what else we can do."
5918,FYI
5919,"8:00 am Call Iv/ Israeli PM Netanyahu
8:10 am Private Residence
8:15 am DEPART Private Residence
En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am OFFICE TIME
11:15 am Secretary's Office
11:20 am DEPART State Department
En route Andrews Air Force Base
11:50 am ARRIVE Andrews Air Force Base
12:00 pm DEPART Andrews Air Force Base
En route White Plains, Westchester County Airport
1:00 pm ARRIVE White Plains, Westchester County Airport
1:10 pm DEPART Westchester County Airport
En route Private Residence
1:25 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5922,"Rec'd and printed all 13. Will be on your desk.
>"
5923,"Yep! Received 13. Printed and on your desk.
>"
5924,"http://www.ft.com/cms/s/5799a774-b534-11df-9af8-00144feabdc0,dwp_uuid=236ce648-33fa-11da-adae-
00000e2511c8,print=yes.html
Financial Times FT.com
r
.
OLUMNISTS
JVlartin Wolf
Obama was too cautious in fearful times
By Martin Wolf
Published: Au• ust 31 2010 22:48 j Last updated: August 31 2010 22:48
Suppose that the US presidential election of 1932 had, in fact, taken place in 1930, at an early stage in the Great
Depression. Suppose, too, that Franklin Delano Roosevelt had won then, though not by the landslide of 1932. How
different subsequent events might have been. The president might have watched helplessly as output and employment
collapsed. The decades of Democratic dominance might not have happened.
On such chances the wheel of history turns. But this time was different: the crisis brought Barack Obama to power close
to the beginning of the economic collapse. I (among others) then argued that policy needed to be hugely aggressive. Alas,
it was not. I noted on February 4 2009, at the beginning of the new presidency: ""Instead of an overwhelming fiscal
stimulus, what is emerging is too small, too wasteful and too ill-focused."" A week later, I asked: ""Has Barack Obama's
presidency already failed? In normal times, this would be a ludicrous question. But these are not normal times. They are
times of great danger. Today, the new US administration can disown responsibility for its inheritance; tomorrow, it will own
it. Today, it can offer solutions; tomorrow it will have become the problem. Today, it is in control of events; tomorrow,
events will take control of it. Doing too little is now far riskier than doing too much."" This was right.
The direction of policy was not wrong: policymakers — though not all economists — had learnt a great deal from the 1930s.
Sensible people knew that aggressive monetary and fiscal expansion was needed, together with reconstruction of the
financial sector.
But, as Larry Summers, Mr Obama's chief economic adviser, had said: ""When markets overshoot, policymakers must
overshoot too"". Unfortunately, the administration failed to follow his excellent advice. This has allowed opponents to claim
that policy has been ineffective when it has merely been inadequate.
In consequence, the administration has lost credibility with the public and the chances of a renewed fiscal expansion have
disappeared. With the Federal Reserve cautious, too, the likelihood of a lengthy period of weak growth and heavy
joblessness is high. So, too, are the chances of domestic and global political friction.
True, the idea that the policies adopted in the last few months of the Bush administration and the first months of this one
were far better than nothing is weirdly controversial in the US. A recent paper by Alan Blinder, former vice-chairman of the
Fed, and Mark Zandi of Moody's argues that such critics are wrong. They use a standard macro-economic model to
assess what would have happened without any intervention, without the financial interventions (including monetary policy)
and without the fiscal action. They conclude that the peak to trough decline in gross domestic product would have been
close to 12 per cent with no policy response, compared to an actual decline of just 4 per cent (see chart). Similarly, the
unemployment rate would have peaked at 16.5 per cent, instead of the actual 10 per cent. The bigger collapse would also
have meant a fiscal deficit of $2,600bn in fiscal year 2011. The outcome is also disastrous with the modest fiscal response
but no financial •olic res•onse. It is a little better the other way round.
The implication that the modest stimulus package of February 2009 — a mere 5.7 per cent of 2009 GDP, spread over
several years — made a positive contribution is supported by the analysis of the Congressional Budget Office: it argues
that in 2010, US GDP will be between 1.5 per cent and 4.1 per cent higher and the unemployment rate between 0.7 and
1.8 percentage points lower, as a result of the package.
Panglossians who believe the private economy is always in equilibrium, unless governments intervene, disagree. I wish
there were some way to run this experiment without hurting hundreds of millions of people. But I find the idea that allowing
the collapse of much of the financial system, avoiding unconventional monetary policy and struggling to close the fiscal
deficit would have been consistent with a more rapid and sustained recovery quite bizarre.
A fascinating perspective does come, however, from comparisons with what happened in other advanced countries. The
recession in US output (and so demand) has been relatively small, but the decline in employment has been exceptionally
large, as a result of an extraordinary surge in US productivity (see charts). This contrast between what would happen to
output and what would happen to employment was missed in the initial Congressional Budget Office analysis of the
stimulus.
Since the US was the epicentre of the financial crisis, the relatively small decline in output is remarkable. Moreover, since
fiscal and monetary stimuli bear directly on demand and output, not jobs, this is a policy success. At the same time, the
enthusiasm with which US managers laid off workers is also extraordinary. No doubt, some of this is due to the collapse in
construction. But some of it must be due to the ease with which US companies can lay off workers and the incentives for
managers to maintain profits in a downturn at the expense of jobs.
Debate is emerging on how much of the surge in unemployment is structural. My answer, from European experience, is
that one way to ensure it becomes structural is to let it linger. In the short run, the simplest way to prevent that from
happening is to expand demand and so output. Since there is huge slack in the labour market, not the slightest threat of
inflation — far more a risk of deflation — and no constraint from bond or foreign exchange markets on further monetary and
fiscal stimulus, these are the policies that have to be pursued. Yet, alas, the Fed seems to have decided to fall asleep and
the administration has lost the initiative.
So what is going to happen? I assume that, after the midterm elections, resurgent Republicans will offer new tax cuts and
ignore the fiscal deficits. They will pretend that this has nothing to do with any reviled stimulus, though it is much the same
thing — increasing fiscal deficits, thereby offsetting private frugality. That would put the administration on the spot. It would
have to choose between vetoing the tax cuts and accepting them, so allowing the Republicans to get the credit for their
""yacht and mansion-led"" recovery. Any recovery is better than none. But it could have been much better than this. Those
who were cautious when they should have been bold will pay a big price.
martin.wolf@ft.com
More columns at www.ft.com/martinwolf
Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2010. Print a single copy of this article for personal use. Contact us if you wish to
print more to distribute to others.
""FT"" and ""Financial Times"" are trademarks of the Financial Times. Privacy policy I Terms
Copyright The Financial Times Ltd 2010."
5925,Word from palestinians
5926,"Neera Tanden
Monday, November 1, 2010 11:35 PM
Hi Hillary,
I hope you are enjoying your travels. I'm trying to keep the Go, Fight, Win spirit, but I must confess,
it's a bit hard.
I promise I will do this rarely, if at all, in the future, but I am once again sending my column. This
time I am doing so because it references you and also because it created some buzz related to the
primaries.
Looking forward to seeing you in December.
Neera
PO,!T1CS
The Female Factor
Jcw the Democrats can regain women 3 faith—and fightfor their interests.
era 111""(leP1
MORE FROM TH!S AUTHOR
Neera Tanden: How °barna Can Win the Battle Over the Economy
What Will It Tate For the Left to Rally Behind Obama Again?
Tanden: Why Liberal Dissatisfaction With Obarna Is Way Overblown
Last week, as Democratic candidates across the country reached out to female voters in the final swing
before Election Day. the White House released a report on how
The report highlights the Obama's administration's efforts and accomplishments on behalf of
.‘vomen's economic success—small business expansion that helps female business owners, jobs tax credits
that help women (and lnera) find jobs, and laws to enforce equal pay for equal work„ among other
initiatives. Yet the report passed with little fanfare and even less media attention—like so many other
aspects of the president's remarkably pro-woman policy agenda.
It's almost tragic how this agenda has fallen under the radar during Obama's first two years in office. We
hear too often about abortion's controversial role in the year-long health care negotiations—but not
enough about other women-centered issues that, after being promoted by activists for years, have finally
made it into legislation. These go beyond the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act. The American Reinvestment
and Recovery Act dramatically expanded child care provisions and Head Start. The health cafe bill
contained over $i billion to support nurses visiting new and expectant mothers at home, a program that
women's groups and economists alike have championed as a smart investment. An even bigger victory is
the CLASS Act, also part of the health care bill, which provides a basic cash benefit to people (often
women) who are taking care of the elderly at home.
Yet I can probably count on my hand the number of people, including women, who actually know about
these new laws. Amid the din of bad news about the economy and misinformation about health care
reform, these policies don't stand a chance, sadly, of getting much media coverage. it doesn't help that the
Democrats haven't done enough to shine a public spotlight on them.
But they could soon be lost in an even deeper abyss: The rampant individualism and free-market
fundamentalism support-ed by the Republican Party, which seems on the 1
.Drecipice of controlling -die
House and possibly the Senate, could undo these initiatives entirely. What's more, the new Republiicpm
wave could mute the voice of women and their most important advocates on the national stage.
The Ten Parties, fueled by wealthy multimillionaires, are running extreme candidates—including
women like Sharron Angie and Christine O'Donnell—who want to get rid of policies that help women the
most. If the health care bill gets repealed, for instance, the new provisions for !ong-term care would go out
the window, making decades worth of advocacy work moot.
But the Tea Parties threaten women in other ways, too. .ff the Republicans take back the _House, the
Democratic Party will lose one of its most powerful women: Speaker Nanc,
„' Pelosi, who currently has more
clout than any woman on the other side of the aisle, Meanwhile, Republicans like Sarah Palin and Nikki
Haley will only gain political power—and, with that .power, attract more attention to their extreme views.
If these Republicans become the nation's loudest voices of seemingly strong women, that could portend
for a shift among younger women's allegiances toward the Republican Party and its platform.
Already, despite the stark realities about what Republicans will likely take away from women once. they are
in power, we are seeing rumbling of such a change: After forming the backbone of Democratic majorities
for years, working-class women are wobbling in theii support the the Obama administration. According to
a fron. last week, while femaie college graduates savor Democratic over
Republican control (56 percent to 36 percent), women With only some college or a vocational education
are running almost even k A • '
Perhaps, in their growing economic anxiety, this group of women wafits to throw out incumbents they
perceive have not sufficiently focused on their economic progress. But, of course, if the media paid more
attention to Obama's pro-woman agenda—and both advocates and policymakers did more to broadcast
it—these key voters would know that the Democrats, not Republicans, are the politicians who have their
interests in mind.
Democrats can't let this continue—they can't allow Republicans to brand themselves as the party of strong
female leaders, or allow women to gradually become a constituency of the right. That's why it's critical to
have standout women in the party. If Pelosi loses, is there a powerful enough Democratic woman to
compete with these Republicans in the national spotlight? There's Hillary Clinton who, as Secretary of
State, has sent a powerful signal to the country and the world about the importance of female leadership in
the Obama administration, But, as a technically non-partisan international figure, Hillary won't be able to
do public battle with the rising right,
Perhaps a Governor Sink—if she wins—in Florida could be among a new class of strong female Democrats.
The °barna administration would also do well to elevate v.,/onien in the exe.cutive branch and turn public
attention to those who are already there.
In addition to •presenting women as the face of the patty, Democrats must focus on issues like long-term
care, child care, and equal pay, all of which could rise to the legislatle fore in the coming months.
Republicans will likely directly attack or cut beck investments in these initiatives. When this happens, the
White House (and Democrats more broadly) would be wise to e.:;olain what ili niean for women if these
i •
nitiatives are gutted or lost—and to fight tooth and nail to make s-a•.e that doesn't happen.
If it doesn't take these steps, the Democratic Party could lose ts grasr on a cr3-ni‘al. Pveii central 7-,eit of its
coalition. And women, in the long run, would suffer under conservative laws that parrot family -values, but
do nothing to value families.
Neera Tanden is the chiTcoperatina office, of Center for . ozriefn P—oc,-ress, SJ.e served in the
ObalRe. and C:-
:;qton adininistrUHOTZS.
.■1?;;RT :•IAR7.0 0;n:cr,,"
5927,"See below. Terrific piece from the BBC which I will circulate.
Meant to mention yesterday that I am going to Buenos Aires, Montevideo and Santiago next week. In Buenos Aires and
Montevideo I will speaking at two business conferences being hosted by Council of the Americas and in Chile I will be
visiting some of the public diplomacy programs we launched after the earthquake.
You may recall that I have a long-standing relationship with Christina Kirchner going back to my Discovery days. We had
quite a large and successful business there. We are trying to arrange for me to meet with her when I am in BA
and Arturo has briefed me on points he would like me to make if I get to spend some time with her.
I thought yesterday went well although I think it is going to be hard going to keep the world interested and committed
to raising the necessary funding.
im"
5929,"H: Pat Lang's view of the resumed talks. Sid
.""IsraePaestinialpeace talks expected to resume in Se4zitember"" Washst
""The Middle East peace process resumed in May, after a hiatus of 19 months, but it stalled
again over the terms of moving from indirect talks, mediated by U.S. envoy George Mitchell,
to direct negotiations.
.israel insists it is ready for direct talks, provided there are no preconditions. The Palestinians
are ready provided there is a clear agenda. Israel says an agenda means preconditions.
Resolving the snag over terms is crucial, diplomats say."" Washpost
The former NY Times reporter Judy Miller likes to address me as ""gloomy gus"" or some such
thing when I encounter her. Well, stand by for some more gloom.
The second Camp David talks failed because Dennis Ross and company placed the
Palestinian delegation in a position in which a ""solution"" was demanded and expected by the
Americans and Israelis on the basis of bargaining during the negotiations themselves.
This seemed reasonable at the time to the US and Israeli negotiators. After all, is this not
what one does? Should not the outcome be the product of the dialectic of argument and
persuasion?
Arabs generally think not. They tend to believe that negotiations are for the purpose of of
arranging the details of outcomes that are understood in advance of the conference itself. For
them, anything else is an attempt to win concessions through trickery.
""The Palestinians are ready provided there is a clear agenda. Israel says an agenda means
preconditions.""
Hello! What kind of nonsense is this? Have we learned nothing?
And then, there is the ""little"" matter of the non-participation of Hamas. Does the Obama
Administration really think that this 600 pound gorilla can be ignored? Is this some sort of
scheme on the part of Natanyahu, and ""the boys"" to discredit Abbas so that an isolated
Hamas can be attacked and destroyed later?
Realism in diplomacy is a desirable thing. George Mitchell used to be smarter than this. His
staff should be advising him not to do this. Failure will be catastrophic.
All the players should be engaged, and they are not. The outcome should be known in
advance and it is not.
This is both childish and destructive. pl
http://www.washiLigtorsost. cortilwp-dyn/contentiarticie;2010/0811 9/AR201 0081 907203 htrni"
5930,"sbwhoeop
Wednesday, September 1, 2010 11:47 AM
H
H: fyi. more on mid-term strategy... Sid
Since you are on this tack: This is a cri de coeur from the guy who wrote ""The Political Brain"" and was a major Obama
supporter, Drew Westen. I'll write you another memo very soon... Sid
AlterNet / By Drew Westen
,24 COMMENTS
What Created the Populist Explosion and How
Democrats Can Avoid the Shrapnel in
November
To say that the American people are angry is an understatement. The only question at this point is how to mitigate the
damage when the bomb detonates in November.
September 1, 2010
LIKE THIS ARTICLE ?
Join our mailing list:
Sign up to stay up to date on the latest headlines via email.
ftagiou,
-b ialEffilgandwa ol§to PolilitN
To say that the American people are angry is an understatement. The political brain of Americans today reflects a volatile
mixture of fear and fury, and when you mix those together, you get an explosion. The only question at this point is how to
mitigate the damage when the bomb detonates in November.
The bad news is that it's too late for Democrats to do what would have been both good policy and good politics (and what
the House actually did do), namely to pass a major jobs bill when it was clear that the private sector couldn't keep
Americans employed. The ""Obama Doctrine"" should have been that Americans who want to work and have the ability to
contribute to our productivity as a nation should have the right to work, and that if the private sector can't meet the
demand for jobs, we have plenty of roads and bridges to fix, new energy sources to develop and manufacture, and
schools to build and renovate so our kids and workers returning for training can compete in the 21st century global
economy. From having spent much of the last four years testing messages on a range of issues, from immigration to
taxes and deficits, I can say with some certainty that nothing John Boehner or Eric Cantor could say could come within 30
points of generating the enthusiasm -- particularly among swing voters -- of a message that began, ""We don't have a
shortage of work ethic in this country, we have a shortage of work."" That message resonates across the political
spectrum. And it isn't even the strongest message we've tested in the last weeks or months that beats back the toughest
deficit-cutting language the other side can muster.
But it's too late for that. The administration opted for an alternative doctrine, which Larry Summers enunciated on This
Week several months ago: that unemployment is going to remain high for the foreseeable future and eventually come
down -- as if there's nothing we can do about it -- and that they will push here and there for small symbolic measures
whose symbolism tends to escape people who are out of work. It's hard to be excited by symbolism when your children
are hungry or the bank is repossessing your home -- although you didn't do anything to deserve it -- while the people who
did are once again making out like bandits.
Although the situation looks bleak for Democrats in November, it ain't over 'til it's over. Republicans are shooting
themselves in the foot all over the country, running Tea Party candidates who are so far to the right you can't see Middle
America from their porch. And some endangered Democrats will likely see victory in November from theirs if they
understand the public mood and speak to it.
What is that public mood? It can be characterized by a single phrase -- populist anger -- and it cuts across partisan lines.
On the right, it is alloyed with racial anxiety and prejudice. On the left, it is alloyed with tremendous disappointment at
what could have been if we had the kind of bold leadership for which times like these cry out. And among people in the
vast political center, populist anger is alloyed with anxiety and uncertainty -- about their jobs, their homes, and their
children's future.
How to Create a Populist Explosion: A Tragedy in Two Acts
So how did we get here? The story can be told as a tragedy in two acts.
Act I: The GOP Sets the Country on a Course of Economic Destruction and the President Calls for Truth and
Reconciliation without the Truth Part
• A strong economic downturn devolves into a Great Recession, as the stock market crashes and major banks fail.
By October 2008, upper middle class moderate Republicans in the suburbs are so frightened by what's happening
to their assets that they're willing to give Democrats a chance.
• A Republican administration that believes in neither government nor regulation creates a 700 billion bank bailout
with no accountability. Unlike Republicans, who would say ""no"" in a situation like this and let a Great Recession
turn into a Great Depression, Democrats do the right thing, but they don't make it clear from the start that these
are Bush Bailouts and remind Americans, over and over, that the cause of all the bankruptcies is the bankruptcy
of Republican ideology.
• A charismatic young president raises people's hopes and expectations, as he uniquely can. Americans are
frightened, but they are willing and waiting to hear an alternative narrative to ""government is the problem, not the
solution"" and a path back to economic recovery and security.
• The White House refuses to tell the American people three stories they desperately need to hear.
• The first is why the economy has gone into the ditch, and who did it. The president is steadfast in his position that
we should ""look forward, not backward,"" even as the GOP is blocking his every initiative to clean up its mess. As
conservative attacks on him and Democrats increase, he refuses to indict the Republicans in Congress or
President Bush for having destroyed our economy and putting one in eight Americans out of work and one in five
either behind on their mortgage or in the process of having their homes foreclosed by the same bankers who
gambled them away. Why did he need to tell the American people who was responsible for their misery -- and to
repeat it again and again? Because otherwise, if the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression didn't
subside within a year and half, voters would start to associate it with him and his party. This is Neuroscience 101 -
- it's how mental associations are formed. But the president never even uttered George W. Bush's name in his
first year in office, and the first time he did mention Bush was to appoint him, along with former President Clinton,
to co-lead American relief efforts in Haiti. The president doesn't like putting antagonists in any of his stories, but if
forced to, he would cite unnamed ""naysayers,"" ""Washington politics as usual,"" or ""Congress,"" which was
counterproductive given that Congress was held by his party. The guiding belief at the White House implicit in this
messaging strategy was that Americans have a good grasp on economics and good memories:
• The second story the American people needed to hear from the president was why deficit spending is essential
when the economy is spiraling downward. It's not a hard story to tell, even in a sound bite. But one of the best
educators to occupy the Oval Office in decades chose not to educate -- he actually did it once, with prodding, but
never repeated what was a superb explanation --- nor did he remind voters every time his opponents attacked
him for deficit spending that they had left him with a 1.2 trillion dollar deficit on the day he walked into office
because of their unpaid-for tax cuts to millionaires and unpaid-for war on Iraq that called on no one to sacrifice
except our soldiers and their families (and our kids and grandkids, who will be paying off this war for generations).
A year later, with Democrats on the ropes, the president started to tell that story. It was the right move, but
appeared defensive because it hadn't been part of his guiding narrative from the start.
• The third story the president needed to offer was an alternative narrative on government. The president and his
party were about to offer effective government as a solution to multiple problems after 30 years of solid branding
by conservatives since Ronald Reagan about how government is the problem. But the narrative never came.
• The White House and Democratic Congress pass what virtually all economists outside the Goldman Sachs-to-
Washington pipeline consider a half-stimulus that they predict will likely produce half-results. It fulfilled its promise.
But the equally predictable political result was a discrediting of the concept of government intervention to
stimulate the economy in the eyes of the public -- enough to scare off Democratic lawmakers from doing what
they learned about Keynesian economics in intro economics for the indefinite future. Instead of blasting the
Republicans for having hurled the country toward an abyss that would now take drastic measures to avert and
warning the American people that this could easily be the first of two or three trillion-dollar packages that might be
needed to get Americans back to work and to get the gears of the economy grinding again before we could start
returning to the kinds of surpluses Bill Clinton had left the last time a Democrat was in the White House, the
president chose to compromise with a party that was so unpopular when he took office that only 20 percent of
voters at that point would even admit to a pollster that they considered themselves Republicans -- the lowest point
for the GOP since the rise of public opinion polling 50 years earlier.
• The economy continues its free-fall, shedding 700,000 jobs a month. Meanwhile, Democrats don't take the kind of
dramatic steps necessary to stop the bleeding. Americans are becoming desperate, but they remain hopeful that
this new president will turn things around, and that perhaps the jobs provisions of the new ""stimulus"" act will do
cauterize the wound. Meanwhile, the stimulus is being portrayed by Republicans as a mixture of pork and fat, and
no one is effectively answering the charges, creating increasingly negative associations to an act that was never
adequately crafted or sold.
• The logical follow-up to a bill designed to pull the economy out of a ditch is to make such a bill unnecessary in the
future, by attacking Wall Street for having thrown us into crisis and passing strong legislation to rein in the
excesses that created the economic meltdown. This would have sealed the American people's loyalty to the new
president and Congress. (Heading into November, this is, in fact, the most popular piece of legislation the
Democrats have passed, but it took them nearly a year and a half to get there, and by then, neither the president
nor the Democratic Congress enjoyed the good will of the average American.) Instead, the same banks that
received bailouts are foreclosing in record rates on the homeowners whose payroll taxes funded the bailouts but
don't seem to get the same kind of attention to their needs from the federal government. Adding insult to injury,
the banks double and triple credit card interest rates to as high as 30 percent, including on people's existing credit
card debt -- while continuing to receive no-interest loans from the federal government.
• Despite talk of accountability, no one is fired (except one auto executive), virtually no one is prosecuted or even
investigated as far as anyone knows, and banks that received bailouts flaunt record bonuses.
Act II: An Anemic Economy Meets an Anemic Health Care Plan
• The public has been clamoring for health care reform. Over 40 million people don't have health insurance at all,
and the 85 percent of voters who do have health care have seen their costs double during the Bush years at the
same time as real income has declined. Effective narratives on health care are widely available that win by a 2:1
margin against the toughest Harry-and-Louise anti-reform language from the other side. The opposition knows it,
as evident in a leaked memo by Republican wordsmith Frank Luntz, who warns that this will be an uphill climb for
opponents of reform, who would do well to accept some major elements of it.
• But instead of using any of the well-tested narratives that were highly effective during the campaign or devising
any new ones of its own, the administration decides to try to ""sell"" health care without a narrative. (I wrote about
this in detail a year ago and will not repeat that history here, except in telegraphic form.) The president refuses to
state where he stands on any of the substantive debates about health reform for a year, such as whether we
should have a ""public option"" (a term so ill-conceived it's hard to believe the public supported it anyway; imagine
the support it might have received if it had been called instead ""the one health care plan the health insurance
companies don't get to control""). Instead, the White House uses phrases such as ""bending the cost curve"" while
conservatives flood the airwaves with evocative phrases such as ""government takeover,"" ""a bureaucrat between
you and your doctor,"" and ""death panels.""
• Instead of using Big Pharma and the health insurance industry as the villains of the health care story, which would
explain why we need an overhaul rather than a Band-Aid, the White House once again offers a story without
protagonists or antagonists, and cuts secret deals with both industries that become public.
• Over interminable months of trying to get the votes of the same Republicans who fought against Medicare for
seniors for 30 years until the program was just too popular to keep attacking it and who are still trying to gut Social
Security despite its popularity, the public then watches what George Will describes as the ""serial bribery"" of
Republican and Democratic Senators alike, as each gets to take his or her turn as the 60th vote.
• At the 11th hour, as a compromise plan is finally going to pass, the president nixes the idea of a Medicare-like
alternative Americans can choose over a health-insurance industry plan if they so desire, despite 60 percent of
even swing voters wanting it included in the bill.
• Instead of being the signature bill that demonstrates both that Democrats can govern effectively and that
government can be a force for good for working and middle class Americans (who have just been told that the
better plans they've negotiated or been offered for years by their employers are ""Cadillacs"" that are going to be
taxed out of existence), the entire process proves to the average American that government can't do anything
right and scares moderate Democrats away from voting for any other bill that would ever put them on the record
supporting government or spending.
• ""Government"" hits an all-time low in the polls, matching the popularity of big corporations, CEOs, and bailouts.
• Populist anger emerges as the primary emotion across the political spectrum, and the president's job approval
with swing voters drops into the high thirties.
• Following the conventional wisdom, Democrats return to their all-too-familiar defensive crouch, and conclude that
when in trouble, tack right. On health care, the president and his Cabinet fan out all over television to ""reassure""
the public on health care that abortion won't be covered (thanks for the reassurance, but most of us didn't find that
reassuring), that domestic partners won't be covered, and that immigrants won't be covered. None of these issues
needed to be conceded. (I know this because I tested messages on them, and well- messaged progressive
positions on them would have boosted the popularity of the bill with swing voters.)
• The White House starts adopting failed conservative policies and talking points that leave the public utterly
confused about where the president, and by extension, his party, stands on the central issues of the day. The
president talks about cutting deficits and increasing spending in the same breath, using the metaphor of families
tightening their belt in tough times, which only strengthens resolve against stimulating a faltering economy;
pledges support for massively expanding offshore drilling and ""clean coal"" (which doesn't exist, by the way) in a
speech on climate change; and sends in 1200 additional National Guards to Arizona as an apparent reward for
passing ""No Latino Left Behind,"" while publicly objecting to the legislation.
• The underlying psychological assumption of these moves is that if you mix policies from the right and left in equal
parts, you win the center. In fact, no one has ever won the center that way. It appears weak, opportunistic, and
incoherent to the average swing voter, which is particularly problematic at a time when people in the center
desperately want to know that their leaders have a vision and a coherent plan for what to do (which is why both
FDR and Ronald Reagan were so effective in moving voters in the center). It doesn't win any votes on the right.
But it does have one predictable effect: It sucks the motivation out of your base, who feel demoralized and
betrayed (if they're part of the ""professional left"") or less likely to vote (if they're average voters who don't follow
politics carefully but just don't feel very enthusiastic anymore, even if they don't really know why).
• Capping it all off, the BP disaster occurs two weeks after the president has adopted the ""drill here, drill now,"" ""all
of the above"" position of the Republican Party and the oil companies. This could have been the perfect
opportunity to go on the offensive, contrast what Democrats stand for (common sense, protection of our safety,
the land we leave our children, and key American industries and jobs, and sticking up for ordinary Americans
against big businesses and their lobbyists) with what Republicans stand for; and connect the dots between what
happened on Wall Street (with regulators owned and operated by the companies they were supposed to regulate)
and what happened in the Gulf (where precisely the same thing happened). Instead, the administration finds itself
on the defensive, increasingly sounding like a subsidiary of BP, allowing BP to call the shots and control
information for weeks, defending increasingly hard-to-believe statistics, and issuing press releases that appear
indistinguishable from those issued by BP but are inconsistent with assessments of independent scientists.
Where Do We Go from Here?
So that is where we find ourselves today: a Democratic Party and Democratic base that is demoralized and unlikely to
vote in high numbers in November; a Republican Party that is selling replanted Bushes with tremendous enthusiasm; and
a vast political center filled with voters who are utterly confused and unsure who to turn to but certain that things aren't
going well.
In January 2009 no one could have predicted that Democrats would be in this predicament today. Perhaps Democrats
might lose a few seats lost in an off-year election, but certainly no more than that. We had just seen -- and the American
public knew we had just seen -- the most disastrous performance by a president and party in living history, and the
American people had elected a tremendously charismatic young president with enormous Democratic majorities in both
houses of Congress. They had given the president and Congress a strong mandate for whatever kind of change was
necessary to get us out of economic free-fall and to put Americans back to work.
But there were red flags already by the end of Obama's first week in office that led me to offer the following advice to the
new administration: Tell the story of how we got in this mess or you'll own it. Tell a coherent story about deficit spending.
Re-brand government because there's only one story out there now (Reagan's), and it's not one that supports a
progressive agenda. Never let attacks go unanswered, because doing so only emboldens your opposition and leads the
public to believe that you have no answers to them. And if you throw a bipartisan party and no one comes, don't throw
another one. All of what followed has been as predictable as it has been unfortunate. A year and a half later, the White
House hasn't consistently done any of these things, although the President is now intermittently doing some of them, and
when he does, he does them well.
The question today is whether Democrats can channel the populist anger we are seeing around the country this late in the
game. The answer is that we'd better try. Having recently tested messages on economics and jobs, including how to talk
about deficits and taxes -- widely assumed to be Democrats' Achilles Heel, particularly now -- there is little question that if
Democrats and progressives from center to left simply say what they believe in ways that are evocative, values-driven,
and speak to people's worries and 'anger, many stand a good chance of surviving November, particularly when their
opponents have nothing to say other than warmed-over rhetoric about cutting taxes to millionaires and multinationals and
fiscal restraint except where it cuts into profits of their campaign contributors. Even the most evocative boilerplate
conservative messages fall flat against honest messages that speak to the need to get Americans working again. And on
issue after issue, no message is more resonant right now than one that sides with working and middle class Americans
and small business owners against special interests, big business, and their lobbyists.
But actions speak louder than words, and Americans want to see action. It may be too late for the kind of jobs bill we
should have seen a year and a half ago, but it isn't too late for Democrats to go on the offensive against the Republicans -
- virtually all of them -- who opposed extending unemployment insurance to millions of Americans who were thrown out of
work by the Republicans' corporate sponsors. It isn't too late for Democrats to contrast their support for the highly popular
aid to state and local governments that just saved the jobs of hundreds of thousands of teachers, firefighters, and police
all over the country with Republicans' desire to throw them out onto the street. It isn't too late to make a voting issue out of
the bill the Republicans are stalling that would give small businesses a fighting chance in an economy stacked against
them, and to make clear that one party stands for small businesses, which create 75 percent of the new jobs in this
country, and the other party stands for big businesses that outsource American jobs and offshore their profits to avoid
paying their fair share of American taxes. It's not too late to pass a bill that would limit credit card interest rates to a
reasonable percent above the rate at which credit is made available to credit card companies. It's not too late to pass the
first badly need ""fix"" to the health care reform act to demonstrate to Americans that Democrats mean it when they say this
was just the first step, namely a law that stops insurance companies from increasing their premiums by 40 percent while
cutting the size of their networks by 50-75 percent, which violates the principles of affordability and choice that were so
essential to efforts to sell health care reform to the public. It's not too late to vow to change the rules of the Senate to
prevent the use of the filibuster to give every special interest veto power over every important piece of legislation. It's not
too late to introduce legislation that's been on hold in both the House and Senate to guarantee fair elections, so that the
voice of everyday Americans is heard over the voice of the special interests that finance political campaigns.
On every one of these issues, a strong populist message trounces anything the other side can say. But Democrats need
to play offense. They need to take up-or-down votes on bill after bill, including those they expect the other side to block,
knowing that every one of those votes has the leverage of a campaign ad behind it. They need to change the narrative
from what sounds to the average American like a whiny and impotent one -- ""the Republicans won't let us do it"" -- to a
narrative of strength in numbers shared with their constituents. And they need to make every election a choice between
two well-articulated approaches to governance -- and to offer their articulation of both sides' positions and values.
That leads to a final point. What Democrats have needed to offer the American people is a clear narrative about what and
who led our country to the mess in which we find ourselves today and a clear vision of what and who will lead us out. That
narrative would have laid a roadmap for our elected officials and voters alike, rather than making each legislative issue a
seemingly discrete turn onto a dirt road. That narrative might have included -- and should include today -- some key
elements: that if the economy is tumbling, it's the role of leadership and government to stop the free-fall; that if Wall Street
is gambling with our financial security, our homes, and our jobs, true leaders do not sit back helplessly and wax eloquent
aboUt the free market, they take away the dice; that if the private sector can't create jobs for people who want to work,
then we'll put Americans back to work rebuilding our roads, bridges, and schools; that if Big Oil is preventing us from
competing with China's wind and solar energy programs, then we'll eliminate the tax breaks that lead to dysfunctional
investments in 19th century fuels and have a public-private partnership with companies that will create the clean, safe
fuels of the 21st century and the millions of good American jobs that will follow.
That's what Democrats stand for. It's time they said it.
Drew Westen, Ph.D., is Professor of Psychology and Psychiatry at Emory University, founder of Westen Strategies, and
author of The Political Brain: The Role of Emotion in Deciding the Fate of the Nation."
5932,"Lissa Muscatine <
Friday, August 20, 2010 11:09 AM
Re: Most importantly....
Thanks for your nice words. They mean a lot. I will always, always play for your team, officially or not!
Many more thoughts on sports diplomacy that I'm excited about. And yes, once a jock, now an aging jock!
On QDDR article, you'll see that a lot is missing (most notably a section on the Middle East, as well as China, Western
Hemisphere (we should probably mention ECPA), a good energy example per David Goldwyn, et. al). it may also be too
Pakistan heavy, though it is a great example of everything we are trying to do. My main goal was to try to ground the
many elements at play in a more coherent narrative with a theme and thread that carried through. Didn't have enough
time on the bottom third. Hopefully this version gives us something to work with, though.
And I really hope you get some semblance of time off this week. If only the world would, for once, cooperate.
On Aug 19, 2010, at 3:51 PM, H wrote:
> It has, as always, been a joy to have you on the team. We've worked
> together for so long, that I always feel better when I know you're
> there--putting words in my mouth and watching my back.
> I enjoyed our talk and was delighted to hear about all you're planning
> to do--especially on the sports front. Just goes to show, once a jock
> always a jock!
> Thx too for the rescue effort you're doing on the ODOR article.
>"
5933,"October 12, 2010
For: Hillary"
5935,Fyi
5937,Fyi
5938,"Hurricane Tomas in route to Haiti to hit 4 Nov right now on southern claw.
SouthCom's announcement:
USS IWO JIMA DEPLOYS TO HAITI AS TROPICAL STORM APPROACHES
MIAMI - U.S. Southern Command directed the amphibious ship USS Iwo Jima (LHD 7) to steam toward Haiti today in
preparation for the forecasted arrival of tropical storm Tomas later this week.
Iwo Jima will deploy to Haiti from Suriname, where it arrived Thursday on its final country visit for Continuing Promise
2010, a four-month, humanitarian civic assistance deployment to eight nations in the Caribbean region. The ship is
scheduled to arrive in Haiti later this week.
Large amphibious ships, like Iwo Jima, resemble small aircraft carriers and include the ability to support helicopter and
landing craft operations to quickly move personnel and cargo, making it an ideal platform to support humanitarian-relief
missions on short notice.
A crew of 1,600 military and civilian medical, engineering, aviation, logistical and other support personnel are embarked
aboard Iwo Jima, including U.S. Navy engineers, a contingent of 500 Marines with logistical-support expertise,
volunteers from the U.S. Public Health Service and various non-governmental organizations (NG0s), as well as medical,
dental and engineering professionals from Europe, North America and South America.
Eight CH-46 Sea Knight, medium-lift, dual-rotor helicopters; two MH-60 Knight Hawk helicopters and two amphibious
landing craft units (ICU's) are on Iwo Jima to support the ship's operations.
Iwo Jima is a Wasp-class amphibious ship capable of speeds in excess of
20 knots that can provide robust ship-to-shore, as well as shore-to-shore logistics support during contingencies ranging
from traditional military operations to humanitarian and disaster-relief missions.
Because of the Caribbean region's history of severe-weather events during the peak months of the hurricane season, the
ship has remained in the area throughout its present deployment, ready to support U.S.
disaster relief efforts when directed.
Iwo Jima was in Port-de-Paix, Haiti, from July 24 through Aug. 3. It was the first stop on CP10 and the crew provided
medical assistance to more than 4,000 Haitian citizens, performed 32 surgeries, completed six engineering projects, and
delivered 231 pallets of humanitarian-assistance supplies donated by NG0s.
In September 2008, the amphibious ship USS Kearsarge deployed to Haiti to support U.S. relief efforts after a succession
of storms (Fay, Gustav, Hanna and Ike) devastated the country. Kearsarge provided robust air and sealift support,
delivering 3.3 million pounds of food, water and other aid to communities impacted by the disasters.
###
Related links:
About Continuing Promise 2010:
http://www.southcom.mil/AppsSC/factFiles.php?id=155
Photo of USS Iwo Jima:
http://www.southcom.mil/AppsSC/images/uploads/634159131775283089.jpg
CLASSIFICAT1ON:UNCLASSIFIED"
5941,"Sent via DROID on Verizon Wireless
Original message"
5942,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence *En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am PREP MEETING
9:45 am Secretary's Outer Office
10:00 am TRILATERAL w/ISRAELI PM BINYAMIN NETANYAHU AND
10:30 am (t) PALESTIAN NATIONAL AUTHORITY PRESIDENT MAHMOUD
ABBAS Benjamin Franklin Room, 8`h Floor
10:30 am (t) TRILAT w/ISFtAELI PM BINYAMIN NETANYAHU, PALESTIAN
11:30 am (t) NAT'L AUTHORITY PRES. MAHMOUD ABBAS, & SPECIAL
ENVOY GEORGE MITCHELL Secretary's Outer Office, 7th Floor
11:30 am (t) BILATERAL w/ ISRAELI PM BINYAMIN NETANYAHU AND
12:30 pm (t) PALESTIAN NATIONAL AUTHORITY PRESIDENT MAHMOUD
ABBAS Secretary's Outer Office, 7th Floor
12:30 pm (t) OFFICE TIME
6:00 pm (t) Secretary's Office
6:00 pm (t) DEPART State Department *En route Private Residence
6:10 pm (t) ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5943,Fyi
5944,"America's Faltering Search for Peace in the Middle East: Openings for Others?
Remarks to staff of the Royal Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and, separately, to members of the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs
Ambassador Chas W. Freeman, Jr. (USFS, Ret.)
1 September 2010, Oslo, Norway
You have asked me to speak to current American policies in the Middle East, with an emphasis on the prospects for
peace in the Holy Land. You have further suggested that I touch on the relationship of the Gulf Arabs, especially Saudi
Arabia, to this. It is both an honor and a challenge to address this subject in this capital / at this ministry.
The declaration of principles worked out in Oslo seventeen years ago was the last direct negotiation between Israelis and
Palestinian Arabs to reach consequential, positive results. The Oslo accords were a real step toward peace, not another
deceptive pseudo-event in an endlessly unproductive, so-called ""peace process."" And if that one step forward in Oslo in
1993 was followed by several steps backwards, there is a great deal to be learned from how and why that happened.
There can be no doubt about the importance of today's topic. The ongoing conflict in the Holy Land increasingly disturbs
the world's conscience as well as its tranquility. The Israel-Palestine issue began as a struggle in the context of European
colonialism. In the post-colonial era, tension between Israelis and the Palestinians they dispossessed became, by
degrees, the principal source of radicalization and instability in the Arab East and then the Arab world as a whole. It
stimulated escalating terrorism against Israelis at home and their allies abroad. Since the end of the Cold War, the
interaction between Israel and its captive Palestinian population has emerged as the fountainhead of global strife. It is
increasingly difficult to distinguish this strife from a war of religions or a conflict of civilizations.
For better or ill, my own country, the United States has played and continues to play the key international part in this
contest. American policies, more than those of any other external actor, have the capacity to stoke or stifle the hatreds in
the Middle East and to spread or reverse their infection of the wider world. American policies and actions in the Middle
East thus affect much more than that region.
Yet, as I will argue, the United States has been obsessed with process rather than substance. It has failed to involve
parties who are essential to peace. It has acted on Israel's behalf to preempt rather than enlist international and regional
support for peace. It has defined the issues in ways that preclude rather than promote progress. Its concept of a ""peace
process"" has therefore become the handmaiden of Israeli expansionism rather than a driver for peace. There are
alternatives to tomorrow's diplomatic peace pageant on the Potomac. And, as Norway has shown, there is a role for
powers other than America in crafting peace in the Holy Land.
Over thirty years ago, at Camp David, Jimmy Carter pushed Israel through the door to peace that Egypt's Anwar Sadat
had opened. Twenty years ago, the first Bush administration pressed Israel to the negotiating table with Palestinian
leaders, setting the stage for their clandestine meetings in Oslo. The capacity of the United States to rally other
governments behind a cause that it espouses may have atrophied, but American power remains far greater than that of
any other nation. Nowhere is this more evident than in the Middle East.
For more than four decades, Israel has been able to rely on aid from the United States to dominate its region militarily and
to sustain its economic prosperity. It has counted on its leverage in American politics to block the application of
international law and to protect itself from the political repercussions of its policies and actions. Unquestioning American
support has enabled Israel to put the seizure of ever more land ahead of the achievement of a modus vivendi with the
Palestinians or other Arabs. Neither violent resistance from the dispossessed nor objections from abroad have brought
successive Israeli governments to question, let alone alter the priority they assign to land over peace.
Ironically, Palestinians too have developed a dependency relationship with America. This has locked them into a political
framework over which Israel exercises decisive influence. They have been powerless to end occupation, pogroms, ethnic
cleansing, and other humiliations by Jewish soldiers and settlers. Nor have they been able to prevent their progressive
confinement in checkpoint-encircled ghettos on the West Bank and the great open-air prison of Gaza.
Despite this appalling record of failure, the American monopoly on the management of the search for peace in Palestine
remains unchallenged. Since the end of the Cold War, Russia — once a contender for countervailing influence in the
region — has lapsed into impotence. The former colonial powers of the European Union, having earlier laid the basis for
conflict in the region, have largely sat on their hands while ringing them, content to let America take the lead. China,
India, and other Asian powers have prudently kept their political and military distance. In the region itself, Iran has
postured and exploited the Palestinian cause without doing anything to advance it. Until recently, Turkey remained aloof.
On rare occasions, as in the case of the 1973 Arab oil embargo, the Arabs have backed their verbal opposition to Israel
with action. Egypt and Jordan have settled into an unpopular coexistence with Israel that is now sustained only by U.S.
subventions. Saudi Arabia has twice taken the initiative to offer Israel diplomatic concessions if it were to conclude
arrangements for peaceful coexistence with the Palestinians. But, overall, Arab governments have earned the contempt
of the Palestinians and their own people for their lack of serious engagement. For the most part, Arab leaders have
timorously demanded that America solve the Israel-Palestine problem for them, while obsequiously courting American
protection against Israel, each other, Iran, and — in some cases — their own increasingly frustrated and angry subjects and
citizens.
Islam charges rulers with the duty to defend the faithful and to uphold justice. It demands that they embody
righteousness. The resentment of mostly Muslim Arabs at their governing elites' failure to meet these standards
generates sympathy for terrorism directed not just at Israel but at both the United States and Arab governments
associated with it.
The perpetrators of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attack on the United States saw it in part as reprisal for American
complicity in Israeli cruelties to Palestinians and other Arabs. They justified it as a strike against Washington's protection
of Arab governments willing to overlook American contributions to Muslim suffering. Washington's response to the attack
included suspending its efforts to make peace in the Holy Land as well as invading and occupying Afghanistan and
Iraq. All three actions inadvertently strengthened the terrorist case for further attacks on America and its allies. The
armed struggle between Americans and Muslim radicals has already spilled over to Pakistan, Yemen, Somalia, and other
countries. Authoritative voices in Israel now call for adding Iran to the list of countries at war with America. They are
echoed by Zionist and neo-conservative spokesmen in the United States,
The widening involvement of Americans in combat in Muslim lands has inflamed anti-American passions and catalyzed a
metastasis of terrorism. It has caused a growing majority of the world's 1.6 billion Muslims to see the United States as a
menace to their faith, their way of life, their homelands, and their personal security. American populists and European
xenophobes have meanwhile undercut liberal and centrist Muslim arguments against the intolerance that empowers
terrorism by equating terrorism and its extremist advocates with Islam and its followers. The current outburst of bigoted
demagoguery over the construction of an Islamic cultural center and mosque in New York is merely the most recent
illustration of this. It suggests that the blatant racism and Islamophobia of contemporary Israeli politics is contagious. It
rules out the global alliances against religious extremists that are essential to encompass their political defeat.
President Obama's inability to break this pattern must be an enormous personal disappointment to him. He came into
office committed to crafting a new relationship with the Arab and Muslim worlds. His first interview with the international
media was with Arab satellite television. He reached out publicly and privately to Iran. He addressed the Turkish
parliament with persuasive empathy. He traveled to a great center of Islamic learning in Cairo to deliver a remarkably
eloquent message of conciliation to Muslims everywhere. He made it clear that he understood the centrality of injustices
in the Holy Land to Muslim estrangement from the West. He promised a responsible withdrawal from Iraq and a judicious
recrafting of strategy in Afghanistan. Few doubt Mr. Obama's sincerity. Yet none of his initiatives has led to policy
change anyone can detect, let alone believe in
It is not for me to analyze or explain the wide gaps between rhetoric and achievement in the Obama Administration's
stewardship of so many aspects of my country's affairs. American voters will render their first formal verdict on this two
months from tomorrow, on the 2nd of November. The situation in the Holy Land, Iraq, Afghanistan, and adjacent areas is
only part of what they will consider as they do so. But I do think it worthwhile briefly to examine some of the changes in
the situation that ensure that many policies that once helped us to get by in the Middle East will no longer do this.
Let me begin with the ""peace process,"" a hardy perennial of America's diplomatic repertoire that the Obama
Administration will put back on public display tomorrow. In the Cold War, the appearance of an earnest and ""even-
handed"" American search for peace in the Holy Land was the price of U.S. access and influence in the Middle East. It
provided political cover for conservative Arab governments to set aside their anger at American backing of Israel so as to
stand with America and the Western bloc against Soviet Communism. It kept American relations with Israel and the
Arabs from becoming a zero-sum game. It mobilized domestic Jewish support for incumbent presidents. Of course, there
hasn't been an American-led ""peace process"" in the Middle East for at least a decade. Still the conceit of a ""peace
process"" became an essential political convenience for all concerned. No one could bear to admit that the ""peace
process"" had expired. It therefore lived on in phantom form.
Even when there was no ""peace process,"" the possibility of resurrecting one provided hope to the gullible, cover to the
guileful, beguilement for the press, an excuse for doing nothing to those gaining from the status quo, and — last but far
from least — lifetime employment for career ""peace processors."" The perpetual processing of peace without the
requirement to produce it has been especially appreciated by Israeli leaders. It has enabled them to behave like
magicians, riveting foreign attention on meaningless distractions as they systematically removed Palestinians from their
homes, settled half a million or more Jews in newly vacated areas of the occupied territories, and annexed a widening
swath of land to a Jerusalem they insist belongs only to Israel.
Palestinian leaders with legitimacy problems have also had reason to collaborate in the search for a ""peace process."" It's
not just that there has been no obviously better way to end their people's suffering. Playing ""peace process"" charades
justifies the international patronage and Israeli backing these leaders need to retain their status in the occupied
territories. It ensures that they have media access and high-level visiting rights in Washington. Meanwhile, for American
leaders, engagement in some sort of Middle East ""peace process"" has been essential to credibility in the Arab and Islamic
worlds, as well as with the ever-generous American Jewish community. Polls show that most American Jews are
impatient for peace. Despite all the evidence to the contrary, they are eager to believe in the willingness of the
government of Israel to trade land for it.
Previous ""peace processes"" have exploited all these impulses. In practice, however, these diplomatic distractions have
served to obscure Israeli actions and evasions that were more often prejudicial to peace than helpful in achieving
it. Behind all the blather, the rumble of bulldozers has never stopped. Given this history, it has taken a year and a half of
relentless effort by U.S. Special Envoy George Mitchell to persuade the parties even to meet directly to talk about talks as
they first did here in Oslo, seventeen years ago. When the curtain goes up on the diplomatic show in Washington
tomorrow, will the players put on a different skit? There are many reasons to doubt that they will.
One is that the Obama administration has engaged the same aging impresarios who staged all the previously failed
""peace processes"" to produce and direct this one with no agreed script. The last time these guys staged such an ill-
prepared meeting, at Camp David in 2000, it cost both heads of delegation, Ehud Barak and Yasser Arafat, their political
authority. It led not to peace but to escalating violence. The parties are showing up this time to minimize President
Obama's political embarrassment in advance of midterm elections in the United States, not to address his agenda — still
less to address each other's agendas. These are indeed difficulties. But the problems with this latest — and possibly final
— iteration of the perpetually ineffectual ""peace process"" are more fundamental.
The Likud Party charter flatly rejects the establishment of a Palestinian Arab state west of the Jordan River and stipulates
that: ""The Palestinians can run their lives freely in the framework of self-rule, but not as an independent and sovereign
state."" This Israeli government is committed to that charter as well as to the Jewish holy war for land in Palestine. It has
no interest in trading land it covets for a peace that might thwart further territorial expansion. It considers itself unbound
by the applicable UN resolutions, agreements from past peace talks, the ""Roadmap,"" or the premise of the ""two-state
solution.""
The Palestinians are desperate for the dignity and security that only the end of the Israeli occupation can provide. But the
authority of Palestinian negotiators to negotiate rests on their recognition by Israel and the United States, not on their
standing in the occupied territories, Gaza, or the Palestinian diaspora. Fatah is the ruling faction in part of Palestine. Its
authority to govern was repudiated by voters in the last Palestinian elections. The Mahmoud Abbas administration retains
power by grace of the Israeli occupation authorities and the United States, which prefer it to the government empowered
by the Palestinian people at the polls. Mr. Abbas's constitutional term of office has long since expired. He presides over
a parliament whose most influential members are locked up in Israeli jails. It is not clear for whom he, his faction, or his
administration can now speak.
So the talks that begin tomorrow promise to be a case of the disinterested going through the motions of negotiating with
the mandate-less. The parties to these talks seek to mollify an America that has severely lessened international
credibility. The United States government had to borrow the modest reputations for objectivity of others — the EU, Russia,
and the UN — to be able to convene this discussion. It will be held under the auspices of an American president who was
publicly humiliated by Israel's prime minister on the issue that is at the center of the Israel-Palestine dispute — Israel's
continuing seizure and colonization of Arab land.
Vague promises of a Palestinian state within a year now waft through the air. But the ""peace process"" has always
sneered at deadlines, even much, much firmer ones. A more definitive promise of an independent Palestine within a year
was made at Annapolis three years ago. Analogous promises of Palestinian self-determination have preceded or resulted
from previous meetings over the decades, beginning with the Camp David accords of 1979. Many in this audience will
recall the five-year deadline fixed at Oslo. The talks about talks that begin tomorrow can yield concrete results only if the
international community is prepared this time to insist on the one-year deadline put forward for recognizing a Palestinian
state. Even then there will be no peace unless long-neglected issues are addressed.
Peace is a pattern of stability acceptable to those with the capacity to disturb it by violence. It is almost impossible to
impose. It cannot become a reality, still less be sustained, if those who must accept it are excluded from it. This reality
directs our attention to who is not at this gathering in Washington and what must be done to remedy the problems these
absences create.
Obviously, the party that won the democratically expressed mandate of the Palestinian people to represent them — Hamas
— is not there. Yet there can be no peace without its buy-in. Egypt and Jordan have been invited as observers. Yet they
have nothing to add to the separate peace agreements each long ago made with Israel. (Both these agreements were
explicitly premised on grudging Israeli undertakings to accept Palestinian self-determination. The Jewish state quickly
finessed both.) Activists from the Jewish diaspora disproportionately staff the American delegation. A failure to reconcile
either American Jews or the Palestine diaspora to peace would doom any accord. But the Palestinian diaspora will be
represented in Washington only in tenuous theory, not in fact.
Other Arabs, including the Arab League and the author of its peace initiative, Saudi Arabia, will not be at the talks
tomorrow. The reasons for this are both simple and complex. At one level they reflect both a conviction that this latest
installment of the ""peace process"" is just another in a long series of public entertainments for the American electorate and
also a lack of confidence in the authenticity of the Palestinian delegation. At another level, they result from the way the
United States has defined the problems to be solved and the indifference to Arab interests and views this definition
evidences. Then too, they reflect disconnects in political culture and negotiating style between Israelis, Arabs, and
Americans.
To begin with, neither Israel nor the conveners of this proposed new ""peace process"" have officially acknowledged or
responded to the Arab peace initiative of 2002. This offered normalization of relations with the Jewish state, should Israel
make peace with the Palestinians. Instead, the United States and the Quartet have seemed to pocket the Arab offer,
ignore its precondition that Israelis come to terms with Palestinians, and gone on to levy new demands.
In this connection, making Arab recognition of Israel's ""right to exist"" the central purpose of the ""peace process"" offends
Arabs on many levels. In framing the issue this way, Israel and the United States appear to be asking for something well
beyond pragmatic accommodation of the reality of a Jewish state in the Middle East. To the Arabs, Americans now seem
to be insisting on Arab endorsement of the idea of the state of Israel, the means by which that state was established, and
the manner in which it has comported itself. Must Arabs really embrace Zionism before Israel can cease expansion and
accept peace?
Arabs and Muslims familiar with European history can accept that European anti-Semitism justified the establishment of a
homeland for traumatized European Jews. But asking them even implicitly to agree that the forcible eviction of
Palestinian Arabs was a morally appropriate means to this end is both a nonstarter and seriously off-putting. So is asking
them to affirm that resistance to such displacement was and is sinful. Similarly, the Arabs see the demand that they
recognize a Jewish state with no fixed borders as a clever attempt to extract their endorsement of Israel's unilateral
expansion at Palestinian expense.
The lack of appeal in this approach has been compounded by a longstanding American habit of treating Arab concerns
about Israel as a form of anti-Semitism and tuning them out. Instead of hearing out and addressing Arab views, U.S.
peace processors have repeatedly focused on soliciting Arab acts of kindness toward Israel. They argue that gestures of
acceptance can help Israelis overcome their Holocaust-inspired political neuroses and take risks for peace.
Each time this notion of Arab diplomacy as psychotherapy for Israelis has been trotted out, it has been met with
incredulity. To most in the region, it encapsulates the contrast between Washington's sympathy and solicitude for Israelis
and its condescendingly exploitative view of Arabs. Some see it as a barely disguised appeal for a policy of appeasement
of Israel. Still others suspect an attempt to construct a ""peace process"" in which Arabs begin to supply Israel with gifts of
carrots so that Americans can continue to avoid applying sticks to it.
The effort to encourage Arab generosity as an offset to American political pusillanimity vis-a-vis Israel is ludicrously
unpersuasive. It has failed so many times that it should be obvious that it will not work. Yet it was a central element of
George Mitchell's mandate for ""peace process"" diplomacy. And it appears to have resurfaced as part of the proposed
follow-up to tomorrow's meeting between the parties in Washington. It should be no puzzle why the Saudis and other
Arabs could not be persuaded to join this gathering.
As a last thought before turning to what must be done, let me make a quick comment on a relevant cultural factor. Arabic
has two quite different words that are both translated as ""negotiation,"" making a distinction that doesn't exist in either
English or Hebrew. One word, ""musaawama,"" refers to the no-holds-barred bargaining process that takes place in
bazaars between strangers who may never see each other again and who therefore feel no obligation not to scam each
other. Another, ""mufaawadhat,"" describes the dignified formal discussions about matters of honor and high principle that
take place on a basis of mutual respect and equality between statesmen who seek a continuing relationship.
Egyptian President Anwar Sadat's travel to Jerusalem was a grand act of statesmanship to initiate a process of
mufaawadhat — relationship-building between leaders and their polities. So was the Arab peace initiative of 2002. It
called for a response in kind. The West muttered approvingly but did not act. After a while, Israel responded with
intermittent, somewhat oblique suggestions of willingness to haggle over terms. But an offer to bicker over the terms on
which a grand gesture has been granted is, not surprisingly, seen as insultingly unresponsive.
I cite this not to suggest that non-Arabs should adopt Arabic canons of thought, but to make a point about diplomatic
effectiveness. To move a negotiating partner in a desired direction, one must understand how that partner understands
things and help him to see a way forward that will bring him to an end he has been persuaded to want. One of the
reasons we can't seem to move things as we desire in the Middle East is that we don't make much effort to understand
how others reason and how they rank their interests. In the case of the Israel-Palestine conundrum, we Americans are
long on empathy and expertise about Israel and very, very short on these for the various Arab parties. The essential
militarism of U.S. policies in the Middle East adds to our difficulties. We have become skilled at killing Arabs. We have
forgotten how to listen to them or persuade them.
I am not myself an ""Arabist,"" but I am old enough to remember when there were more than a few such people in the
American diplomatic service. These were officers who had devoted themselves to the cultivation of understanding and
empathy with Arab leaders so as to be able to convince these leaders that it was in their own interest to do things we saw
as in our interest. If we still have such people, we are hiding them well; we are certainly not applying their skills in our
Middle East diplomacy.
This brings me to a few thoughts about the Western and Arab interests at stake in the Holy Land and their implications for
what must be done.
In foreign affairs, interests are the measure of all things. My assumption is that Americans and Norwegians, indeed
Europeans in general, share common interests that require peace in the Holy Land. To my mind, these interests include -
but are, of course, not limited to — gaining security and acceptance for a democratic state of Israel; eliminating the gross
injustices and daily humiliations that foster Arab terrorism against Israel and its foreign allies and supporters, as well as
friendly Arab regimes; and reversing the global spread of religious strife and prejudice, including, very likely, a revival of
anti-Semitism in the West if current trends are not arrested. None of these aspirations can be fulfilled without an end to
the Israeli occupation and freedom for Palestinians.
Arab states, like Saudi Arabia, also have compelling reasons to want relief from occupation as well as self-determination
for Palestinians. They may not be concerned to preserve Israel's democracy, as we are, but they share an urgent interest
in ending the radicalization of their own populations, curbing the spread of Islamist terrorism, and eliminating the tensions
with the West that the conflict in the Holy Land fuels. These are the concerns that have driven them to propose peace, as
they very clearly did eight years ago. For related reasons, Saudi Arabia's King Abdullah has made inter-faith dialogue
and the promotion of religious tolerance a main focus of his domestic and international policy.
As the custodian of two of Islam's three sacred places of pilgrimage — Mecca and Medina — Saudi Arabia has long
transcended its own notorious religious narrow-mindedness to hold the holy places in its charge open to Muslims of all
sects and persuasions. This experience, joined with Islamic piety, reinforces a Saudi insistence on the exemption of
religious pilgrimage to Jerusalem from political interference or manipulation. The Ottoman Turks were careful to ensure
freedom of access for worship to adherents of the three Abrahamic faiths when they administered the city. It is an interest
that Jews, Christians, and Muslims share.
There is, in short, far greater congruity between Western and Arab interests affecting the Israel-Palestine dispute than is
generally recognized. This can be the basis for creative diplomacy. The fact that this has not occurred reflects
pathologies of political life in the United States that paralyze the American diplomatic imagination. Tomorrow's meeting
may well demonstrate that, the election of Barack Obama notwithstanding, the United States is still unfit to manage the
achievement of peace between Israel and the Arabs. If so, it is in the American interest as well as everyone else's that
others become the path-breakers, enlisting the United States as best they can in support of what they achieve, but not
expecting America to overcome its incapacity to lead.
Here, I think, there is a lesson to be drawn from the Norwegian experience in the 1990s. The Clinton Administration was
happy to organize the public relations for the Oslo accords but did not take ownership of them. It did little to protect them
from subversion and overthrow, and nothing to insist on their implementation. Only a peace process that is protected
from Israel's ability to manipulate American politics can succeed.
This brings me to how Europeans and Arabs might work together to realize the objectives both share with most
Americans: establishing internationally recognized borders for Israel, securing freedom for the Palestinians, and ending
the stimulus to terrorism in the region and beyond it that strife in the Holy Land entails. I have only four suggestions to
present today. I expect that more ideas will emerge from the discussion period. A serious effort to cooperate with the
Arabs of the sort that Norway is uniquely capable of contriving could lead to the development of still more options for joint
or parallel action on behalf of peace.
Now to my suggestions, presented in ascending order of difficulty, from the least to the most controversial.
First, get behind the Arab peace initiative. Saudi Arab culture frowns on self-promotion and the Kingdom is less gifted
than most at public diplomacy. Political factors inhibit official Arab access to the Israeli press. The Israeli media have
published some — mostly dismissive — commentary on the Arab peace initiative but left most Israelis ignorant of its
contents and unfamiliar with its text. Why not buy space in the Israeli media to give Israelis a chance to read the Arab
League declaration and consider the opportunities it presents? I suspect the Saudis, as well as other members of the
Arab League, would consider it constructive for an outside party to do this. It might facilitate other sorts of cooperation
with them in which European capabilities can also compensate for Arab reticence. The Turks and other non-Arab
Muslims should be brought in as full participants in any such efforts. This wouldn't be bad for Europe's relations with
both. By the way, given the U.S. media's notorious one-sidedness and American ignorance about the Arab peace plan, a
well-targeted advertising campaign in the United States might not be a bad idea either.
Second, help create a Palestinian partner for peace. There can be no peace with Israel unless there are officials who
are empowered by the Palestinian people to negotiate and ratify it. Israel has worked hard to divide the Palestinians so
as to consolidate its conquest of their homeland. Saudi Arabia has several times sought to create a Palestinian peace
partner for Israel by bringing Fatah, Hamas, and other factions together. On each occasion, Israel, with U.S. support, has
acted to preclude this. Active organization of non-American Western support for diplomacy aimed at restoring a unity
government to the Palestinian Authority could make a big difference. The Obama Administration would be under strong
domestic political pressure to join Israel in blocking a joint European-Arab effort to accomplish this. Under some
circumstances, however, it might welcome being put to this test.
Third, reaffirm and enforce international law. The UN Security Council is charged with enforcing the rule of law
internationally. In the case of the Middle East, however, the Council's position at the apex of the international system has
served to erode and subvert the ideal of a rule-bound international order. Almost forty American vetoes have prevented
the application to the Israeli occupying authorities of the Geneva Conventions, the Nuremberg precedents, human rights
conventions, and relevant Security Council directives. American diplomacy on behalf of the Jewish state has silenced the
collective voice of the international community as Israel has illegally colonized and annexed broad swaths of occupied
territory, administered collective punishment to a captive people, assassinated their political leaders, massacred civilians,
barred UN investigators, defied mandatory Security Council resolutions, and otherwise engaged in scofflaw behavior,
usually with only the flimsiest of legally irrelevant excuses.
If ethnic cleansing, settlement activity, and the like are not just ""unhelpful"" but illegal, the international community should
find a way to say so, even if the UN Security Council cannot. Otherwise, the most valuable legacy of Atlantic civilization -
its vision of the rule of law — will be lost. When one side to a dispute is routinely exempted from principles, all exempt
themselves, and the law of the jungle prevails. The international community needs collectively to affirm that Israel, both
as occupier and as regional military hegemon, is legally accountable internationally for its actions. If the UN General
Assembly cannot ""unite for peace"" to do what an incapacitated Security Council cannot, member states should not shrink
from working in conference outside the UN framework. All sides in the murder and mayhem in the Holy Land and beyond
need to understand that they are not above the law. If this message is firmly delivered and enforced, there will be a better
chance for peace.
Fourth, set a deadline linked to an ultimatum. Accept that the United States will frustrate any attempt by the UN
Security Council to address the continuing impasse between Israel and the Palestinians. Organize a global conference
outside the UN system to coordinate a decision to inform the parties to the dispute that if they cannot reach agreement in
a year, one of two solutions will be imposed. Schedule a follow-up conference for a year later. The second conference
would consider whether to recommend universal recognition of a Palestinian state in the area beyond Israel's 1967
borders or recognition of Israel's achievement of de jure as well as de facto sovereignty throughout Palestine (requiring
Israel to grant all governed by it citizenship and equal rights at pain of international sanctions, boycott, and
disinvestment). Either formula would force the parties to make a serious effort to strike a deal or to face the
consequences of their recalcitrance. Either formula could be implemented directly by the states members of the
international community. Admittedly, any serious deadline would provoke a political crisis in Israel and lead to diplomatic
confrontation with the United States as well as Israel, despite the Obama Administration itself having proclaimed a one-
year deadline in order to entice the Palestinians to tomorrow's talks. Yet both Israel and the United States would benefit
immensely from peace with the Palestinians.
Time is running out. The two-state solution may already have been overtaken by Israeli land grabs and settlement
activity. Another cycle of violence is likely in the offing. If so, it will not be local or regional, but global in its reach. Israel's
actions are delegitimizing and isolating it even as they multiply the numbers of those in the region and beyond who are
determined to destroy it. Palestinian suffering is a reproach to all humanity that posturing alone cannot begin to
alleviate. It has become a cancer on the Islamic body politic. It is infecting every extremity of the globe with the rage
against injustice that incites terrorism.
It is time to try new approaches. That is why the question of whether there is a basis for expanded diplomatic cooperation
between Europeans and Arabs is such a timely one. And it is why I was pleased as well as honored to have been asked
to set the stage for a discussion of this issue."
5945,"Ebeling, Betsy
Thursday, September 2, 2010 2:38 PM
H
You look beautiful!!!!
ole0.bmp; ole0.bmp"
5948,Gotta love him
5949,"PIR <preines
Thursday, September 2, 2010 6:33 PM
H
CDM; Huma Abedin; Lona Valmoro; Jake Sullivan
Joint Interview
MS —
Jake just relayed yoLir desire to cancel tomorrow's interview. But I want to make sure you are aware of a few things that
he was not in a position to share:
1) The Israeli & Palestinian interviewers and their teams skipped returning home today with their principals at great
cost and energy in order to stay the extra day to you. One skipped traveling onward with Abbas.
2) Both the Israeli & Palestinian media outlets involved immediately announced their joint interview and are hyping its
unprecedented nature
3) Because of #2, U.S. media is fully aware that this interview is scheduled for tomorrow morning.
So three points:
1) There is an incredibly high expectation for this interview occurring and canceling, no matter the reason cited, will be
taken to mean something negative2) The point of this interview was to shape the narrative coming out of today, and
canceling will only contribute to a negative narrative in that we will be canceling on the most important figure in Israeli
media, and I do not see Channel 2 taking that well3) As positive as the symbolism of this interview was meant to be,
we run the risk of the negative symbolism by canceling.
Typically when you want to cancel something I roll with it. But I want to strenuously object to doing so in this case. I
understand you told the participants they should refrain from public comment, but first, that doesn't mean you have to
and second, you know they won't really refrain. And I am certain they will appreciate the effusive things you have to say
about them during this interview. Not to mention that the reason for canceling is something we ourselves could have
foreseen before going so far down the road, and should have - which I don't think is fair or reflects well on you.
Lastly, on a much more practical note: to get you out of this I am going to have to bribe Channel 2 with a significant and
exclusive interview when we are in Jerusalem in two weeks, and I guarantee you that will be far more painful than
tomorrow's relative short and peaceful format.
If you'd like to discuss I'm at my desk and available or can call you through Ops."
5950,"PIR <preines
Thursday, September 2, 2010 6:48 PM
H
CDM; Huma Abedin; Lona Valmoro; Jake Sullivan
Re: Joint Interview
Before I call Udi Segal of Channel 2 I would like your ok to commit you to an interview while in Jerusalem on the next
trip."
5951,"and which you could do
Otheriwse it would be Channel 2 solo,
IN Israel
Sent from my iPad
On Sep 2, 2010, at 9:00 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> What did you decide? I'm assuming you got my earlier email saying I'm willing to do if we have answer on moratorium."
5952,"PIR <preines
Thursday, September 2, 2010 9:11 PM
H
Re: Interview
RELEASE IN PART
B5, B6
B5"
5953,Aye aye
5954,"Importance: High
Fyi"
5955,"PIR
Thursday, September 2, 2010 9:47 PM
H
Jake Sullivan; Huma Abedin; Lona Valmoro
Interview is ON
RELEASE IN
PART B5, B6
Humpty Dumpty is back together again - so at 9:15 you will be jointly interviewed by Channel 2 and PTV"
5956,"requested
Calling you.
On Wed, Nov 17, 2010 at 7:13 PM, Huma Abedin <Huma@clintonemail.com> wrote:"
5957,"PIR <preines
Thursday, September 2, 2010 10:09 PM
H
Jake Sullivan; Huma Abedin; Lona Valmoro
Re: Interview is ON
And don't pretend you're not seeing this! We know your tricks"
5958,"PVerveer
Thursday, September 2, 2010 10:30 PM
H
Fwd: good luck- re middle east
from Inez McCormack in Belfast
B6"
5959,"Dan who?
No, they are on"
5960,"Yes, I will set something up for her."
5961,Huma has the QA and the transcript of Mitchell's briefing for you.
5962,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence *En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:30 am OFFICE TIME
10:00 am Secretary's Office
Time Tbd PHONE CALL w/SULTAN OF OMAN *Secretary's Office
10:00 am BILATERAL w/AUSTRALIAN FM KEVIN RUDD
10:30 am Secretary's Conference Room *Official photo in East Hall preceding.
10:30 am PRESS PRE-BRIEF
10:35 am Secretary's Office
10:35 am JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/AUSTRALIAN FM KEVIN RUDD
10:45 am Treaty Room, 7th Floor
10:45 am OFFICE TIME
11:30 am Secretary's Office
11:30 am FIRST US.-INDONESIAN JOINT COMMISSION MTG w/INDONESIAN FM
12:45 pm DR. MARTY NATALEGAWA Benjamin Franklin Room, 8th Floor *Camera spray
preceding.
12:45 pm BILATERAL w/INDONESIAN FM DR. MARTY NATALEGAWA
1:00 pm James Madison Room
1:00 pm WORKING LUNCHEON w/INDONESIAN DELEGATION
1:45 pm James Monroe Room *Official photo at top.
1:45 pm PRESS PRE-BRIEF
2:00 pm Secretary's Office or 8th Floor Tbd
2:00 pm JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/INDONESIAN FM NATALEGAWA
2:15 pm Benjamin Franklin Room, 8th Floor
2:30 pm SWEARING-IN CEREMONY FOR GERALD FEIERSTEIN,
2:50 pm U.S. AMBASSADOR TO YEMEN Treaty Room, 'Ph Floor
3:00 pm PHOTOS (2)
3:10 pm Secretary's Outer Office
3:15 pm MEETING w/INDIAN FOREIGN SECRETARY NIRUPAMA RAO
3:30 pm Secretary's Outer Office *Official photo at top.
3:30 pm OFFICE TIME
4:00 pm Secretary's Office
4:00 pm FAREWELL FOR LISSA MUSCATINE
4:15 pm Secretary's Outer Office
4:15 pm OFFICE TIME
5:20 pm Secretary's Office
5:25 pm DEPART State Department ''En route Andrews Air Force Base
5:55 pm ARRIVE Andrews Air Force Base
6:00 pm DEPART Andrews Air Force Base via Military Plane Tail #Tbd
En route Westchester County Airport, White Plains
7:00 pm ARRIVE Westchester County Airport
7:05 pm DEPART Westchester County Airport *En route Private Residence
7:20 pm ARRIVE Private Residence"
5964,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence *En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am JOINT TAPED INTERVIEW w/UDI SEGAL, ISRAELI CHANNEL 2; & AMIRAH
9:45 am HANANIA RISHMAWI, PALESTINIAN TV Thomas Jefferson Room, 8.Floor
9:45 am VIDEOS (3)
10:00 am Thomas Jefferson Room, 8th Floor
10:00 am PHOTO w/ ANNE-MARIE SLAUGHTER
10:05 am Secretary's Office
10:15 am SPEECH PREP MEETING
11:00 am Secretary's Outer Office
11:00 am MEETING w/SPECIAL ENVOY SCOTT GRATION
11:30 am Secretary's Outer Office
11:30 am PRIVATE MEETING w/ TOMICAH
11:45 am Secretary's Office
11:45 am MEETING w/ASSISTANT SECRETARY ARTURO VALENZUELA
12:15 pm Secretary's Outer Office
12:15 pm (t) PHONE CALL w/QATARI AMAR HAMAD BIN KHALIFA AL-THANI (T)
Secretary's Office
12:30 pm OFFICE TIME
1:15 pm Secretary's Office
1:20 pm DEPART State Department *En route Washington National Airport
1:40 pm ARRIVE Washington National Airport
2:00 pm DEPART Washington National Airport via US Airways Shuttle #2174
En route New York, NY
3:25 pm ARRIVE New York, New York-LaGuardia Airport
3:35 pm DEPART New York-LaGuardia Airport *En route Private Residence
4:25 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
5965,"Will do.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
5967,Importance: High
5968,"Yes, I will do another check in about an hour but sounds like things are fine.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
5969,"I didn't plan for him but can certainly reach out now to see if he is available. If he is not, should I move to next week?
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
5970,FYI
5971,"isit AT Al Gezir October 8 2010 Final.docx
Fyi:
READOUT OF MEETING AT Al Gezira Club WITH HIS CHILDREN
On October 8, 2010 - went to the Al Gezira club to see his children
as per the court ordered visitation dated June 30, 2010, which stipulated twice monthly visits on alternate
nda s. This was the first such visit to take pl e visit was scheduled for 12:00 p.m.
and ACS Chief arrived at 11:55 a.m. he ked in with the security office at the club and then waited at the
playground for the children. At approximately 1:20 p.m., arrived with the children, her two brothers, and a
cousin. There was a discernible State Security presence througriout the visit.
At one point, the ACS Chief received a duty call and stepped 20 feet away from the group to handle the call.
Post continues to work closely with Egyptian authoritie:"
5972,"jonathan prince
Friday, September 17, 2010 4:23 PM
thank you
Madam Secretary -
I just wanted to drop you a quick note to thank you again for the great opportunity to be part of
your team over the last twenty months. I can't tell you how much I appreciate it - and how much of
a pleasure it's been to watch you work when I've had the chance. .
I will definitely stay involved in the Middle East stuff while I'm in the private sector. And - as I
know you know - I hope I have the chance to do more for you down the road.
Please know that you can count on me for anything you need.
Best.
Jonathan"
5973,"Nice piece on Cameron Munter.
Safe travels.
Jm"
5975,"H: 58 days left. Whether the Democrats have the ability and will to execute is a separate subject: ""If it were done, when
'tis done, then 'twere well it were done quickly..."" Making Boehner the GOP poster child should be systematic and
relentless. Tick, tock, another day gone. Sid
September 3, 2010
Americans Most Likely to Favor GOP
Newcomers for Congress
Three in four believe influx of new members would improve
Congress
by Jeffrey M. Jones
PRINCETON, NJ -- It appears that the best type of candidate to be this fall is a Republican challenger. Given a choice of
four hypothetical candidates of differing party affiliations and experience, Americans are most likely to prefer ""a
Republican who has not served in Congress."" Those who would prefer a Democratic candidate opt for an incumbent over
a newcomer.
These results, based on an Aug. 27-30 USA Today/Gallup poll, underscore the advantageous political environment for
Republicans and non-incumbents this midterm election season. Overall, a majority of Americans prefer a Republican
candidate (regardless of experience) to a Democrat, 53% to 40%. And a majority also prefer a non-incumbent (regardless
of party affiliation) to an incumbent, 54% to 39%.
The fact that Americans who prefer a Republican candidate want one who is new to Congress suggests that these voters
want both GOP control of Congress and the new perspectives that come from members with no prior Washington
experience. Americans who favor Democratic candidates, on the other hand, apparently are more satisfied with the type
of experienced representatives now in Congress.
One would naturally expect Democrats to prefer Democratic candidates, and Republicans to prefer Republican
candidates, and that is the case when looking at the data by party. But partisans' preferences for incumbents versus
challengers seem to be influenced by their knowledge that the Democrats currently have a majority in Congress, and thus,
more Democrats will be defending House seats this fall. Democrats are more likely to prefer a Democrat who is in
Congress to a Democrat who is not, and Republicans are more likely to prefer a Republican outside of Congress to one
who is currently serving there. Independents also show a strong preference for Republican non-incumbents.
The data do not necessarily indicate how Americans would vote in the fall when presented with a choice of two specific
candidates for Congress. This fall, voters will generally be asked to choose between one Republican and one Democratic
candidate, one of whom may be an incumbent. When asked in the same poll whether they are more likely to vote for the
Republican or the Democratic congressional candidate in their district if the elections were held today, 48% of Americans
say the Republican and 43% the Democrat.
The appeal of non-incumbents is apparent in another question in the poll that finds 75% of Americans saying Congress
would be changed for the better if ""most of the present members of Congress are replaced with new members."" Only 14%
think that would make Congress worse. This is consistent with Gallup's findings from earlier this year suggesting strong
anti-incumbent sentiment.
Americans across key demographic subgroups widely share the belief that Congress would be improved if most members
were turned out of office. However, there is a significant gap by political party, with 89% of Republicans versus 63% of
Democrats saying that replacing most members of Congress would be beneficial. Again, the difference likely stems from
Democrats' current status as the majority party in Congress.
Implications
In a year when Americans are dissatisfied with the state of the nation and give relatively low ratings to the president and
Congress, it is not politically beneficial to be either an incumbent or a member of the ruling party. That is reflected in
Americans' preference for a Republican newcomer over other types of candidates they may have a chance to vote for in
this fall's midterm congressional elections. It is also reflected in prior analysis of historical Gallup data showing greater
seat turnover in Congress when the president and Congress are unpopular."
5976,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Friday, September 17, 2010 6:28 PM
Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J
A moratorium by any other name....
I hope you get a true break this weekend; you certainly deserve it. And I am sure someone has already thought of this
idea, but on the off chance it hasn't been raised,
AM"
5978,FYI
5979,"Signed by Pres. Toribiong a couple of hours ago after three days of negotiations that I conducted for Palau and DAS
Frankie Reed led for the US. These were the first real negotiations of the process -- a step (which Jake Sullivan helped
get taken) that was as needed as the changes in the US proposal they produced. Thanks for all that you did. It obtained
US objectives as well as resulted in substantially greater fairness for a former territory, now freely associated state. Jeff
On Jul 28, 2010, at 8:46 AM, H wrote:
> Thx for the ood wishes
> I hope the Palau Compact can be resolved soon because I doubt we will have the funds to do it next year w the budget
and the potential setbacks in the mid-terms. PIS try to work w everyone to finalize.
> And, give my warmest ""Hola"" to my friends in PR.
>"
5981,Give me 10 minutes to get to my car.
5983,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, August 20, 2010 4:03 PM
FW: Congrats Again"
5985,"I read the Roger Cohen piece and agree that it is v smart. And I've been thinking about the need for a headline/bumper
sticker for the speech. How about ""A New American Century""? We cd take on the critics directly and right up front and
make the argument this way (a lot of this is already in the intro, but wd need to be pulled together differently).
1)We live in a new age of diplomacy - we are seeing the limits of force and we face collective problems that require
bringing together a wider array of key players rather than any one nation dictating a solution. Active diplomacy is the
only option. (This is the argument david rothkopf was making to mark landler when we thought landler was doing a
profile - it resonated v well w/ landler.)
2) The U.S. is uniquely suited to lead in these circumstances. a) In situations where many nations must be brought
together that do not trust each other, we are still seen as the most honest broker. b) In situations where many nations
are sitting around the table contemplating a common problem, someone has to step forward and take responsibility for
mobilizing action (which also includes the risk of failure). We are the nation most willing to do that, both because of our
history and our values. (Here is where S can offer personal anecdotes re nations waiting for us to do something) c) in a
world of global problems, we are the most global nation, with the greatest global reach, resources, and connections.
3) We see global leadership not only as a responsibility but also as an opportunity, b/c of our native confidence,
optimism and faith that problems can be solved. We have a chance to shape a genuinely global agenda, focusing on
development as well as traditional national security issues, and mobilizing business and civil society as well as
governments. This is our time.
The speech would then go on, as it does now, to outline all the ways in which we are building relationships and solving
problems now with traditional allies and new powers on the global landscape while building a longer term architecture
of cooperation that is both truly global and adapted to solving 21st century problems.
AM"
5986,"We are working to incorporate some of the missing links but I haven't gotten any comments from anyone. I am hoping
Jake is reading it this afternoon and AMS says she will have comments by this evening. We can get another draft to you
tomorrow if that would be best and save you some time. But do let me know if there is anything major that you think is
off, or should be excised or any other red flags. I won't be able to work on it until later tonight (am driving Max to PA for
a soccer tournament but can work on it when I get there).
On Aug 20, 2010, at 3:16 PM, H wrote:
> I think the article is headed in the right direction but I agree w you
> that the points you mention should be referenced. Are you getting
> comments from others? Should I wait for the next draft to comment?
>"
5987,"Howard Dean sent email at the bottom
Any background on this?"
5989,"First, you've doubtless heard
Second, I just gave extensive comments to Lissa and AMS on the article. Think I see a path to a decent place."
5991,"http://www.pallup.com/pol1/142730/Americans-Give-GOP-Edge-Election-Issues.aspx
September 1, 2010
Americans Give GOP Edge on Most Election
Issues
Greatest Republican advantages on terrorism, immigration,
federal spending
by Jeffrey M. Jones
PRINCETON, NJ -- A new USA Today/Gallup poll finds Americans saying the Republicans in Congress would do a better
job than the Democrats in Congress of handling seven of nine key election issues. The parties are essentially tied on
healthcare, with the environment being the lone Democratic stren th.
The Republicans' advantage on most issues is an indication of the currently favorable political environment for the party.
Of particular note is the parity between the two parties on healthcare, an issue on which Americans historically have
viewed the Democrats as superior.
A similar USA Today/Gallup poll conducted in October 2006, just prior to Democrats' major gains in that fall's elections,
highlights the potential implications of these findings. That poll, which includes several issues measured in the current
survey, found the Democrats leading on all eight issues tested at that time, including some usual Republican strengths
like terrorism and moral values.
With Republicans now having the advantage on most issues, the party may be poised to make major gains in
congressional seats, just as the Democrats did in 2006. Indeed, Gallup tracking of registered voters' preferences in the
2010 generic ballot for Congress continues to find the Republicans ahead of the Democrats, as it has for the past five
weeks.
The Economy Matters Most
The Democrats' advantage on the issue of the environment is likely not something the party can leverage to improve its
2010 electoral fortunes, as Americans rank it at the bottom of the list in terms of its importance to their vote. Rather,
economic concerns are paramount, with a majority of Americans rating the economy, jobs, and federal spending (along
with government corruption) as extremely important.
The Republican advantages on these economic matters range from a low of +5 on jobs to a high of +15 on federal
spending. Terrorism -- the issue on which Republicans have the greatest advantage over Democrats -- is rated as very
important by 47% of Americans, putting it in the middle of the list.
Bottom Line
Republicans' perceptual advantage on most key election issues reinforces the party's advantageous positioning heading
into the stretch run of the 2010 election campaign. It is not clear whether Americans give the Republicans the edge on
these issues because they have confidence in the GOP to make progress in addressing the major problems facing the
country, or whether the ratings have more to do with the public's frustration with the incumbent Democratic Party's
performance to date.
The Democrats' hopes for improving their fortunes may hinge on convincing voters they have superior plans for jump-
starting the economy, the issue of uppermost importance in Americans' minds. That could be tough to do when, after
nearly 20 months of Democratic leadership in Congress and the White House, Americans' opinions of the economy
remain negative and have become more pessimistic in recent weeks."
5992,"Wherever you are. What a great note to start your vacation on. Lissa and I had a great conversation w/ Jake tonight; the
argument is becoming clearer and clearer. I am leery of promises, but we are aiming for another draft to you before
noon on Sunday.
Have fun!
AM"
5993,"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Friday, September 17, 2010 10:21 PM
Slaughter, Anne-Marie; H
Abedin, Huma
Re: A moratorium by any other name...."
5994,"Financial Times FT.com
Politics & Foreign policy
Clinton's aim is true as Democrats' top gun
By Edward Luce in Washington
Published: October 12 2010 20:43 I Last updated: October 12 2010 20:43
Nobody would go so far as to call it a comeback. But Bill Clinton's appearances on the midterm election trail are starting to
turn voters' heads in a way that Barack Obama's simply are not.
Democratic operatives say that Mr Clinton, who went through in 1994 the kind of setback that pollsters say Mr Obama will
face in less than three weeks, is more effective at presenting the election as a choice between starkly different
alternatives rather than a referendum on what people think of the Obama administration.
So far the president, who has booked most of the next three weeks for campaigning, has been unable to pull that off. This
week alone, Mr Clinton has shaken up two Senate races — in Kentucky and West Virginia — with appearances that have
assisted Democratic candidates. Mr Clinton was due to speak in Las Vegas on Tuesday night to assist the embattled
Harry Reid, the Senate majority leader, and then move onto California later in the week.
""Bill Clinton is about as close to a secret weapon as the Democratic party has got,"" says Norm Ornstein, a political analyst
at the conservative American Enterprise Institute. ""He has this ability to fire up the Democratic base that almost nobody
else can do right now."" Mr Clinton's intervention in Kentucky, where Jack Conway, the Democratic candidate, is locked in
a tight race with Rand Paul, the Tea Party icon, is a good case in point.
At the weekend Mr Clinton described Mr Paul, who wants drastically to shrink the size of the US federal government and
has talked of abolishing the Federal Reserve, as a ""radical with no record to back it up"". Mr Paul, who has never run for
elected office, hit back by reminding voters of Mr Clinton's former Monica Lewinsky scandal. ""I am not sure I would trust a
man who had sex with an intern,"" said Mr Paul. ""I mean, do you think he's an honourable person?""
Mr Paul's trip down memory lane appears to have backfired. Few voters seem to care any longer about a scandal that
occurred amid what in retrospect looks like a golden age of balanced budgets, job creation and the absence of foreign
wars.
""Bill Clinton's strength is that he knows how to fight back and turn adversity into advantage,"" says Tad Devine, a veteran
Democratic operative. ""He is also able to enter an individual race, take the temperature, understand what people are
feeling and then base his appeal to voters on that.""
In the West Virginia Senate race, where Joe Manchin, the governor, is trailing John Raese, a wealthy local businessman,
Mr Clinton on Monday came out punching. Referring to Mr Raese's plush Florida vacation home, the former president
said: ""I'm here for a lot of reasons. One is that I don't think it's fair for West Virginia to have one senator and Florida to
have three.""
Acknowledging voter anger in a state where Mr Obama has 29 per cent rating, among the lowest in the country, Mr
Clinton added: 'I am old enough to know that if you make a decision when you are mad — and I am not just talking about
politics here — there is about an 80 per cent chance you will make a mistake.""
In contrast, a lot of Democrats are critical of the way Mr Obama has framed the midterm campaign, shifting from one
attack line to another without sticking to an overarching narrative. Last month, Mr Obama turned on John Boehner, the
Republican congressional leader, in what looked like a move to depict him as the voters' alternative.
More recently, Mr Obama has switched to attacking the Chamber of Commerce for allegedly funnelling foreign money into
attack ads. But it has generated a lot of criticism. ""This election is awash with undisclosed money and it's fair to point out
how disadvantaged the Democrats have been,"" says one consultant. ""But it isn't good politics at this late stage when
voters clearly want to hear about the economy.""
Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2010. Print a single copy of this article for personal use. Contact us if you wish to
print more to distribute to others.
""FT"" and ""Financial Times"" are trademarks of the Financial Times. Privacy policy I Terms
© Copyright The Financial Times Ltd 2010."
5996,PERFECT
5998,"I just want to make sure you saw this. It is the end of a piece Tony Blair did for Time this week that is adapted from his
book. It is very close to what you said on Friday. He also has a line at the beginning of the piece where he talks about
loving ""America's sense of aspiration."" AM"
5999,"One fact that people may not be aware of is that immediately following the election, newly elected Senators
in IL, WV, CO and DE will serve during the lame duck session. In a worst case scenario, that could bring the
Senate Dem total down to 55, which will impact our strategy on START and appropriations, at a minimum."
6000,"Very sweet email from Harvey. Let me know if you want the movies.
You were amazing yesterday. Will look for direction on details for the upcoming talks."
6002,"Lois Quam
Wednesday, November 17, 2010 9:45 PM
Am in Washington Friday, Monday and Tuesday if you have a minute."
6004,"Thanks for making the START calls. Will follow-up as discussed.
On election news, Murkowski has come back a bit, but is still down a good 2K votes. Many rural precincts
have yet to report, and there are some 7600 absentee ballots yet to be counted. Will likely take another week to
come to closure.
With 429 of 438 precincts reporting
Joe Miller (R) 45,909 51.09%
Lisa Murkowski (R) 43,949 48.91%"
6005,I did.
6006,"PVerveer
Wednesday, November 17, 2010 11:55 PM
Thank you!
I can't believe that the conspiracy around me worked! I was so mindful of your murderous schedule today
that it never even occurred to me that you would tack on yet one more thing.
Your showing up was a fabulous surprise, so emblematic of your generosity it so many ways and a wonderful reminder of
the cause that you started me on and grew over these almost 20 years.
Many thanks.
Should you talk to the new Dutch FM in Lisbon, you might thank him for their work on 1325. They are helping other
countries, including in Afghanistan and we hope that they will continue in the new govt.
Good travels and heartfelt thanks.
Melanne"
6007,"Not sure about SRAP. I'll forward it on. Hope the trip is going well.
Jm"
6008,"I hope you have a chance to read what I sent yesterday
And great pic in the Times today!"
6009,"Madam Secretary,
I received the copy of the draft night note on the Colombia and Panama FTAs that you reviewed, but I did not see any
notes/guidance on it. Would you like to B5
Thanks,
Mike
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
(cell) B6"
6010,I will now.
6011,See b/I traffic
6012,"Melanne and Maria,
I just talked to Tara Sonenshine who was with you at the global women's conference organized last
week by Laurie Fulton in Copenhagen — she said that you were both absolutely fabulous and were
the stars of the meeting. I cannot imagine being better represented.
Best,
AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
6014,"Spoke to Kurt. He said he couldn't get any joy on sending a positive signal on an Indonesia trip. Sounds like it well may
not happen at all.
So he said we have no give in this call; just an ask. But we urges that it be made.
Unsatisfying I know, but there we are..."
6015,Was confirmed by voice vote this evening. Landrieu relented.
6017,"Attached is the final version that we sent in with all their proposed edits and our responses marked in track changes and
explained in comments. I have also included 2 additional small edits that I think will help immunize us from complaints by
the human rights/democracy crowd. If you can let me know by early tomorrow whether you approve or what you want to
change I can them make the necessary changes on the document they sent back to us and send it in my the deadline late
tomorrow. Jim Hoge likes the piece and told me that he took a personal hand in the editing. AM"
6018,"I am currently out of the office. If you need immediate assistance, please contact Joanne Laszczych
(LaszczychJ@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
Thank you
cdm"
6019,"Lois Quam B6
Thursday, November 18, 2010 11:56 AM
millscd@state.gov; WoodardEW@state.gov
Re:
Terrific, see you then. Enjoy Portugal."
6021,"My dear Jack
I don't think I knew what bittersweet felt like until I saw this email.
I am happy for you and for what your leadership will offer the President and the country. We are blessed for that and
for you.
Enjoy your new adventure but know your home is always here for you when you need a place of retreat.
XO
Cdm"
6022,ok
6023,"B6
i would advise
B5
B6
Cheryl Mills<
RELEASE IN PART B5,B6"
6026,I am pretty flexible on time of call.
6027,"November 2, 2010
For: Hillary"
6028,"For donilon, he can do from 9:45-12 on fri. What time do u want to do?
Also, they did phone and ringer test and it worked fine. But can only go secure thru ops 647 1512. With red switch, it
was dropping a few times."
6029,FYI
6030,Now is good. -- really any time other than 4:30-5:15 will work. AM
6031,"With regard to the two tops, I agree that Lissa's original top was more elegant, but Jim thought, and Jake and I agreed,
that the piece is not as compelling as it could be if we could be clearer about what you actually see coming down the
road that informs your focus on modernizing diplomacy (e.g., you see the proliferation of foundations, corporations,
ngos in the world as an opportunity, particularly given that we have more problems to deal with with the same
bandwidth, so you want to start training people now to do public private partnerships; or you see public opinion as
steadily increasing in importance, so we have to be doing public engagement in a big way). I tried to do that quickly in
the following graph, but w/o being able to draw all the connections."
6033,Ok
6034,"Thank you, Surprised"
6035,"En route back from India and China. It was good I went to Chennai where I had a full schedule including meeting with
another self-help group like SEWA (500 poor women showed up) It took me back to our trips. Also met with the local
elected village council -- remarkable group of empowered women. I took both experiences to our strategic dialogue
meeting in Delhi where we made excellent progress. We also met with the ""cookstove"" officials to give them heads up
about your initiative (told Roemer too). SEWA will be on stage with you at CGI!
Other good meetings with SEWA on markets, Afghanistan, and solar lanterns. Vital Voices conf was a huge succss. I
couldn't stay for much but your video was well received, Hormats was terrific (he's becoming a rock star with women!)
And F Secretary Rao did a nice job.
Our China experience provided a lot of insights and we will do a short strategy paper for you. We moved the women's
leadership forum forward. Suifficeth to say, there are so many opportunities that I believe we should be taking
advantage of, (which we are not doing) including in the economics track. The women there are growing in power and
influence. More later.
I'll see you for the NY marathon!"
6036,Forward deployed diplomacy taking root in commentary from Hawaii speech. We will use it more in next statements. Kurt
6038,"Given your recognition of the importance of procurement reform, I thought you might like to see that
USAID is getting credit for making changes already. This is both the right thing to do and getting good
press where it counts. AM
Dear Friends and Colleagues:
What if we told you a little-known bureaucratic process called ""Implementation and Procurement Reform,""
IPR for short, was one of the biggest victories for poor people in years? It means more aid can go directly
through a country's own systems, making them stronger. It also means that more aid will be administered
by local organizations who know best what their own communities need.
Through IPR, USAID is putting President Obama's recent global development policy into action. The agency
has set clear targets to increase use of local country systems and organizations, which means that US
assistance will help citizens and their governments build their own capacity, instead of setting up a parallel
system as they've done in recent years. They've set clear and ambitious targets for themselves that are
laser-focused on results, and dedicated to fighting global poverty not just in the short term, but for good.
Photo: Local organizations distribute assistance after performing a needs assessment in Bihar, India.
Ian Bray/OXFAM GB
This reform will likely be criticized by some who think that putting more money in the hands of local actors
will expose USAID's programs to more risk. But this is precisely the point; only by supporting local change
agents—both inside and outside developing country governments—can we actually strengthen the hands of
people in poor countries who are working to change their own societies for the better. That means managing
risk wisely, rather than trying to avoid it altogether. And in our field research, 36 of the 39 activists we
interviewed said they want USAID to support their government's directly, because it would make it easier for
them to hold their governments accountable and prevent corruption.
What does all this mean? It means better aid, aid that strengthens the capacity of reformers in poor countries.
And for the millions of people across the world who have been demanding these reforms, USAID has shown
it is actively listening.
Sincerely,
The Aid Effectiveness Team
p.s. If you want to hear more directly from USAID on this important policy change, RSVP today to
aideffectiveness@savechildren.org to attend ""Country Ownership: Risks & Results"" this Thursday, October
14th at 2pm, room 2255 of the Rayburn House Office Building.
Forward email
Email Marketing by
This email was sent to gadams@oxfamamerica.org by sgrundahl@oxfannamerica.orq.
Update Profile/Email Address I Instant removal with SafeUnsubscribeTm I Privacy Policy.
Oxfam America
226 Causeway Street
5th Floor
Boston, MA 02114"
6041,"Exits show 50 plus loss in house and 7-8 senate
Sent via DROID on Verizon Wireless
Original message"
6042,"Manchen wins. Lincoln lost
Sent via DROID on Verizon Wireless
Original message"
6043,"This was on the Friends of the ARC blog. Brzezinski is pushing this idea hard as well. I will have more of an update on
what is going on re a Palestine Pledge Fund and the ARC later this week. AM
Bernard Avishai urges the Obama Administration to support the Arc
on talkingpointsmemo.com
Friday, October 8, 2010 at 8:27PM
Yesterday Bernard Avishai, adjunct professor at Hebrew University, author of The Hebrew Republic, and a
former editor of the Harvard Business Review, argued in Taking Points Memo:
""If President Obama is looking for a way to excite us with an American vision for a Palestinian state--one that
can be started on even before core issues are (entirely) resolved, and which implies what is plausible about
peaceful integration with Israel and Jordan--he could do worse than publicly get behind the RAND
Corporation's ARC project.""
Avishai acknowledges that the Arc leaves some contentious issues unresolved. ""But,"" he challenges his readers,
""I defy you to watch this short video and think about the state the same way again.""
We offer the same challenge to you. Watch the video, and see if it changes the way you think about the
possibility for a viable two-state solution. If it does, join FOTA, follow us on Facebook, spread the word to
friends, and help the video go viral!
Admin Post a Comment I Share Article"
6045,"Mashabane has offered a call time of 8:00 this morning. If that is amenable to you, I can set it up.
###"
6046,"We should talk about bloomberg when you are back
Sent via DROID on Verizon Wireless
Original message"
6052,"Re-sending with a cc to my personal acct just to be sure I didn't miss an email. In the mean time, I'm working to
determine if there are any other windows of availability"
6053,I thought you'd like to see Vjosa's reaction tp your visit to Kosovo.
6054,"I think we've lost our availability for today but ill double check. If she is free, ill have ops connect her over. If not, she is
avail btw 6-8 am tmw am."
6055,No problem! I'm on it
6057,"http://maxblumenthal.com/2010/11/the-return-of-ghosts-debating-the-rise-of-geert-wilders-and-the-far-right/
The Return of Ghosts: Debating the rise of Geert Wilders and
the far-right at the Nexus Symposium
On 11.18.10, By Max
The Nexus Institute's Return of Ghosts conference was inspired by the rise of far-right politician Geert Wilders in the
Netherlands
I spent last week in Amsterdam, where I participated in the ""Return of Ghosts"" symposium of the Nexus Institute, a
discussion/debate about the resurgence of neo-fascism in Europe and anti-democratic trends in the West. Besides
providing a forum for debating European politics, the symposium was the occasion for the first public appearance in
Europe by Peruvian writer Mario Vargas Llosa since he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature last month. The arrival
of Vargas Llosa, one of the world's foremost intellectuals, resulted in an overflow crowd filled with members of the Dutch
media, the country's political class, and the royal family.
Even with Vargas Llosa in the spotlight, the participants' attention was focused on Geert Wilders, the leader of the far-right
Dutch People's Party for Freedom and Democracy, which is now the third leading party in the Netherlands. With his
gathering influence, Wilders has essentially placed the Dutch coalition government in a stranglehold; the government
meets with him every Wednesday to gauge his opinions and ask for his instructions. While Wilders dictates at will to the
government, he remains independent of it, comfortably avoiding the consequences of policies he has helped to shape. It
is the perfect position for a politician whose agenda is comprised exclusively of xenophobic populism, and typical strategy
of the far-right in countries across the continent.
Wilders' base lies in the mostly Catholic south, where ironically few people have ever encountered a Muslim. He has also
generated support in the city of Groeningen, once a citadel of the communists. Seeking to expand his base, Wilders
promised to hire scores of ""animal cops"" to investigate and prosecute the abuse of animals, a clever wedge strategy in the
only country I know of that has a party dedicated exclusively to animal rights. Of course, Wilders could care less about our
furry friends. His stated goal is to end immigration not just to Holland but to all of Europe; ban the Quran (free speech is
only for the ""Judeo-Christian"" community), and severely limit the rights of Muslim citizens of Europe by, for instance,
instituting what he called a ""head rag tax"" on Muslim women. Wilders' international allies include the goosestepping neo-
Nazis of the English Defense League, the far-right pogromist Pam Geller, the Belgian neo-fascist party Vlaams Belang,
and a substantial portion of the US neocon elite. Over the course of just a few years, he has become perhaps the most
influential Islamophobe in the world.
But does this make Wilders a fascist? Rob Riemen, the director of the Nexus Institute, thinks so. Riemen has just
published a book entitled ""De Eeuwige Terugkeer Van Het Fascisme,"" or ""The Eternal Return of Fascism"" (I eagerly await
its English translation), dedicated to highlighting the danger of Wilders' eerily familiar brand of right-wing populism. In the
book, Riemen urges readers to compare Wilders' politics to the early incarnations of European fascism, not to the
genocidal terminal stage fascism of late World War II. He calls the parallels between Wilders and the early fascists ""one-
and-one."" In an economic and civilizational crisis like the kind the Netherlands is facing, Riemen warns that reactionary
figures like Wilders can easily seize power while centrist elements stand by politely and passively, refusing to call a spade
a spade. Where Wilders' ascendancy will lead is unknown, but if he is not stopped in his tracks, Riemen is certain the
B6
story will not end well. In the week after its publication, Riemen's book flew off the shelves, selling 5000 copies while
generating heated reactions from across the spectrum of debate.
Riemen told me that despite the public enthusiasm for his book, his characterization of Wilders has been attacked as ""un-
Dutch."" In Dutch culture, as in so many others, open confrontation is avoided at all cost. Political disagreement is
welcomed only if it is expressed in a collegial manner, as though nothing more than reputations were at stake. So the
Dutch cultural elite generally goes along to get along. The resistance Riemen has met since he called Wilders out seemed
to have alarmed and frustrated him. Why was it so difficult for liberal elements in the Netherlands to recognize the clear
resonances of fascism in Wilders' political style? he wondered. And why did they seem more concerned with regulating
the terms of debate than with forming a united front against the far-right? Once the symposium opened and I was able to
see the Dutch elite in action, I began to understand Riemen's indignation.
The symposium began with a speech by Vargas Llosa, a complex personality who has allied himself with center-right
parties in Spain and elsewhere but whose politics remain fundamentally rooted in cultural liberalism. Vargas Llosa's
differences with leaders of the left, which he used to belong to, exploded over the issue of free trade. He is an ardent neo-
liberal and reviles Latin populists like Hugo Chavez and 011anta Humala who advocate protectionism and industrial
nationalization.
Vargas Llosa decorated his speech with literary metaphors and natural imagery to describe the challenges of democracy,
particularly in Europe. But the body of the address was devoted to the supposed threat Islamic extremism posed to
Western civilization. Vargas Llosa singled out suicide bombing as the most dangerous phenomenon, pointing to the
Madrid and London bombings by al-Qaida inspired operatives, while curiously not mentioning suicide attacks by secular
groups like the Tamil Tigers and the Kurdish PKK, or the nationalistic suicide terror by Palestinian militants (Vargas Llosa
declared in his speech that ""Israel deserves to be treated like any other nation,"" and has been harshly critical of the state
in the past).
During the first panel, which I participated in, Fania Oz-Salzberger, an Israeli professor of history and the daughter of
famed author Amos Oz, boasted to crowd of Israel's ""vibrant democracy."" She was enthusiastically seconded by Mitchell
Cohen, a former editor of Dissent who has devoted considerable energy to assailing anti-Zionist Jews, writing that ""the
dominant species of anti-Semitism encourages anti-Zionism."" I found it odd that neither expressed any concern over the
almost endless stream of anti-democratic laws passing through the Knesset, or by the general authoritarian, anti-liberal
trend in Israeli society. Oz-Salzberger went on to announce to a smattering of applause that ""Geert Wilders and politicians
like him are not welcomed by Israelis.""
Yet Wilders is one of Israel's most frequent guests, having visited the country over 40 times in 20 years. In fact, he claims
that his views on Islam and Arabs were forged while living on an Israeli moshav. ""Nowhere did I have the special feeling of
solidarity that I get when I land at Ben Gurion airport,"" he once said. Wilders reportedly receives heavy support from Dutch
financial backers of Israel, and has met with a range of Israeli officials. His closest allies lie within the extremist settler
movement, prompting him to call for the forced transfer of Palestinians to Jordan. Members of the liberal Zionist
intelligensia like Oz-Salzberger may not not want Wilders around, but who in Israel is listening to them? Israel's
mainstream leadership echoes Wilders' crudest talking points on a regular basis, while the Zionist left clings to a dwindling
handful of Knesset seats and watches passively — even resentfully — as a rag-tag band of leftist radicals fights for
equality for all. Consider a recent statement by former Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, who is seen as a centrist within the
Israeli political spectrum: ""The origin of terrorism is within Islam,"" Olmert declared this month.
The pro-Israel position of the new breed of European far-rightists has to be recognized as much more than a convenient
political tactic. Of course, saying you ""stand with Israel,"" as Wilders so often does, is an easy way to insulate yourself from
charges of anti-Semitism. But the extreme right is also attracted to Israel because the country represents its highest
ideals. While some critics see Israel as a racist apartheid state, people like Wilders see Israel as a racist apartheid state
— and they like it. They richly enjoy when Israel mows down Arab Muslims by the dozens and tells the world to go to hell;
they admire Israel's settler culture; and most of all, they yearn to live in a land like Israel that privileges its ethnic majority
above all others to the point that it systematically humiliates and dispossesses the swarthy racial outclass. The endgame
of the far-right is to make Europe less tolerant and more Israeli.
After the Italian philosopher Paolo Flores D'Arcais proclaimed that Italy was no longer a democratic country, citing PM
Silvio Berlusconi's control over 90 percent of the country's media, the government's deep seated corruption and the Prime
Minister's repeated attempts to impose onerous restrictions on journalistic freedom, Riemen asked me if the United States
was a democracy given the the rapidly rising influence of corporations over the media and elections. After two panelists
had described Israel as a vibrant democracy while another labeled Italy a non-democratic quasi-dictatorship, I decided
that our definition of democracy was subjective at best. So I sidestepped the question and outlined a few of the greatest
blows to American democracy, from the elimination of the Fairness Doctrine to the Telecommunications Deregulation Act
to the Citizens United SCOTUS decision. Later in the evening, D'Arcais would remark to me with amazement that he
never knew American media was ever regulated in the first place.
During the 20 minutes or so when students of Tilburg University were able to question the panel, one student asked
whether suicide terror was a uniquely Islamic phenomenon, apparently referring to Vargas Llosa's address. I responded
that it of course was not, citing the example of secular groups like the Tamil Tigers which brought the tactic into practice
the second suicide. I recommended the audience review the research of Robert Pape, the University of Chicago political
scientist who demonstrated a clear connection between the American and Israeli occupation of Middle Eastern countries
and the motivations of suicide bombers. Oz-Salzberger jumped in, proclaiming that occupation has little or nothing to do
with the motives of suicide bombers. She did not marshal any evidence to support her point, possibly because our time
was so limited. It would have been hard to do so, however, without supporting the fundamental argument of Wilders about
Islam's inherent violence — or the even sillier theory by the Israeli filmmaker/professional hasbarist Pierre Rehov that
suicide bombers are motivated by sexual repression.
Next, the Dutch panel took the stage. The main attraction was Frits Bolkstein, the longtime leader of the People's Party for
Freedom and Democracy who employed Wilders as his parliamentary aide, providing him a stepping stone to his political
career. He was a silver haired curmudgeon from aristocratic stock who reminded me instantly of the ""paleocon"" characters
I've met while covering white nationalist conventions like American Renaissance.
""Everything went wrong when the government became impressed in the 90's with the idea of the 'good stranger,""
Bolkstein declared. ""If the previous governments had tightened their immigration laws, there would not have been a Mr.
Wilders.""
The only member of the panel to mount a significant challenge to Bolkstein was the Tilburg University professor Paul
Frissen, who argued that the rule of law and basic standards of democracy protects ""the right to be fundamentalist."" The
other panelists either gave Bolkstein's xenophobia a pass or attempted to surpass his resentment of Muslims. After
Bolkstein lightly criticized Wilders' call for banning the Quran, remarking that ""what he says about Islam is nonsense""
because it contradicts the freedom of religion, AB Klink, a former Dutch senator and ex-Minister of Health, chimed in.""It's
not nonsense because Islam is so different in its cultural values than ours,"" Klink claimed.
Then, when Bolkstein called for shutting down Islamic schools, Frissen reminded him that state-supported Christian
schools in the Dutch Bible belt teach theocratic concepts as well. Meindert Fennema, the political biographer of Wilders,
entered the debate to demand that all religious schools be closed. ""I'm against all forms of religious teaching!"" he proudly
exclaimed, sending gales of applause through the audience. ""How can you call yourself a liberal?"" Frissen asked with a
tone of exasperation. Fennema ignored him.
During question time, a young freelance writer from India named Natasha Ginwala asked Bolkstein to answer for the
""ghost of neo-colonialism,"" which ""the African people never voted for."" She mentioned the exploitative deals forced on
developing countries by transnational oil companies, possibly alluding to Bolkstein's role as a manager at Royal Dutch
Shell in authoritarian countries like El Salvador, Indonesia, and Honduras during the 1970's (I'm sure nothing unseemly
happened during Bo!stein's tenure in these places). Bolkstein's responded bluntly, ""If these countries try to be self-
sufficient it just doesn't work!""
After the symposium, I talked to Ginwala and a group of her friends, who were mostly immigrant students. They were
appalled by the ignorance of the Dutch panelists. ""None of them knew the first thing about Islam,"" an Arab student
remarked. ""They couldn't even pretend to understand what Muslims actually believe."" Ginwala added, ""How can Bolkstein
tell me my country can't be self-sufficient? I come from India. It's one of the most diversified economies on the planet.""
I was not in Amsterdam long enough to do any formal reporting. However, I did notice that all of the immigrants I spoke to
were closely and nervously following the rise of the right. At the airport, while waiting to board my flight, I talked to a 20-
something security guard named Muhammad who seemed almost as bored as I was. Muhammad had spent his whole life
in Amsterdam, but his parents were from Cairo, Egypt. He told me he wanted to take his girlfriend on a trip to New York
City and Miami someday. When I brought up the topic of Wilders, he scoffed at his perception of Muslims. ""Most of us
aren't even religious,"" Muhammad said. ""When I hear him talking about Muslims wanting to take over, I just laugh. I'm like,
is this guy serious?""
But he did not underestimate Wilders' appeal. ""Everything he does and everything he says, it seems like it's carefully
planned. He obviously knows what he's doing. And they let him get away with it,"" Muhammad remarked. ""Look, I'm just a
citizen, I'm nobody, but if I say something about Christians or Jews that the government doesn't like, I'll be punished. But
when Wilders, who is a public official, says all the things he says about Muslims, nothing happens to him. Instead, more
and more people are voting for him."""
6059,"Ms,
Mashabane is no longer available this morning, but can do anytime btw 6-8 am tomorrow morning. Let me know if you'd
like us to lock in a time."
6060,"Yes, will work on setting that up and let you know."
6063,"Just got word POTUS has agreed to host NATO summit in US in spring 2012. Alliance expected to agree and
announce this in Lisbon."
6064,You want me to come to chappaqua to help u leave today? Or meet u in nyc?
6065,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, November 3, 2010 10:58 AM
FW: 11/3 0845 Meeting Readout"
6066,"Marking a landmark moment for all
Daily Herald Editorial Board
Published: 8/26/2010 12:05 AM
Today marks a watershed moment in our nation's history.
Know what it is? Any plans to celebrate the occasion? Ninety years ago this day, the United States
secretary of state signed into law the 19th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution giving women the right
to vote.
That significant moment in history securing that basic civil right for one of the two genders in
existence came after a more than 70-year struggle that saw pioneering ""radical"" women jailed and
physically abused as they fought for justice.
Ninety years ago today. Not all that long ago, really. We still have women among us who lived during
a time when this basic but powerful activity was prohibited. Denied to their mothers and
grandmothers, older sisters and aunts.
Illinois played a pivotal role in the struggle, and Illinois and suburban women continue to mark our
history, politics and policy. And they should continue to by exercising their right, speaking out and
working to change policies that affect us all.
Illinois did not allow women to vote in presidential and local elections until 1913 and, according to
votingwomen.org, Illinois, Michigan and Wisconsin were the first three states to ratify the 19th
Amendment on June 10, 1919.
From the start, Illinois and its suburbs have been home to pioneering women. Libertyville's Clara
Colby is listed as the first woman to vote, having cast a ballot for a new town hall while, papers at the
time reported, her husband stayed home to ""scrub clothes in the laundry.""
There is Jane Addams, the Cedarville, III., native social worker and suffragist who founded Chicago's
Hull House and was one of the first women to win a Nobel Peace Prize.
And Illinois has elected 14 female members of Congress. The first was Chicago Republican Winnifred
S. Huck, only the third woman elected to Congress, just two years after the 19th Amendment
ratification. Huck was the first wife and mother elected to Congress. Republican Ruth Hanna
McCormick worked as a Springfield lobbyist who helped pass the law allowing Illinois women to vote
in some elections in 1913 before she moved on to Congress. Democrat Emily Taft Douglas, an early
leader of the League of Women Voters and an internationalist who was the wife of former U.S. Sen.
Paul Douglas and a cousin to President William H. Taft, beat isolationist Republican Stephen Day in
1945, according to the Women in Congress website.
In more recent times, Rockford Republican Lynn Martin moved from Congress to Labor Secretary
and Chicago Democrat Carol Moseley Braun became the first black woman in the U.S. Senate. Now,
of course, we also have Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who hails from Park Ridge. In the suburban
trenches all along the way, women have been leading and agitating for change. Former Democratic
state Rep. Eugenia Chapman of Arlington Heights is credited with helping start community colleges in
Illinois. Republican Giddy Dyer of Hinsdale joined her in supporting the Equal Rights Amendment and
also passed DuPage County's first clean air ordinance. Chapman worked with Republican Virginia B.
Macdonald of Arlington Heights to establish a women's center at Harper College. And omit goes.
Nice, you say, but big deal? Indeed, they were a big deal and, indeed, women shaping our lives still
are a big deal. Men, can you imagine your life without women? Women, can you imagine your life
without other women? American women have come a long way in 90 years and society is the better
for it. Women vote in greater numbers than men and have for years, nationally and in Illinois. They
very well can and should vote, write laws, lead and play even more influential roles in what the next
90 years, and beyond, may bring us all."
6067,"After a cloture petition was prepared there was a negotiation and Landrieu released her hold. Voice vote in the end.
More words of thanks and farewell to follow, but wanted to share the news."
6068,See highlighted area of editorial
6069,Confirmed for 8am tomorrow morning
6070,CONGRATSIIIIII
6072,"sbwhoeop
Thursday, August 26, 2010 9:05 AM
In case you missed, and see last graph. Sid
H: In Case you missed this, by the FT international affairs editor, esp the last graph. Sid
Financial Times FT.corn
A poisoned process holds little hope
By David Gardner
Published: August 25 2010 22:46 1 Last updated: August 25 2010 22:46
„
As the caravans of Middle East peace negotiators rumble into Washington next week for the umpteenth time, the
pervasive cynicism and sense of deja vu all over again is overwhelming — and with good reason.
The Middle East peace process long ago turned into a tortured charade of pure process while events on the ground — in
particular the relentless and strategic Israeli colonisation of occupied Palestinian land — pull in the opposite direction to
peace. ""We have all been colluding in a gigantic confidence trick,"" is how one Arab minister puts it, ""and here we go
again.""
While many factors had combined to hand veto powers to rejectionists on both sides, the heart of the question remains
the continuing Israeli occupation. It is essential to remember that the biggest single increase of Jewish settlers on Arab
and — a 50 per cent rise — took place in 1992-96 under the governments of peace-makers Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon
Peres at.the high-water mark of the Oslo peace accords. Many Israelis will point to the perfidy of the late Yassir Arafat,
who wanted to talk peace but keep the option of armed resistance dangerously in play. But what killed Oslo was the
occupation. The second intifada that erupted a decade ago was essentially the Oslo war.
A decade on, the Israeli settlement enterprise has turned the occupied West Bank into a discontiguous scattering of
cantons, walled in by a security barrier built on yet more annexed Arab land and criss-crossed by segregated Israeli roads
linking the settlements. Last month, B'Tselem, the Israeli human rights group, published a study showing Israel has now
taken 42 per cent of the West Bank, with 300,000 settlers there and another 200,000 in East Jerusalem. The siege of
Gaza has turned that sliver of land into a vast, open-air prison.
The main feature of the present situationi is the disconnect between the high politics of the utterly discredited peace
process and these — in Israeli parlance — ""facts on the ground"".
At last month's White House summit, where Barack Obama and Benjamin Netanyahu massaged their long estrangement
into a political armistice, the US president praised the Israeli prime minister as a leader ""willing to take risks for peace"".
But there is no evidence for this whatsoever. True, in June last year, in response to Mr Obama's Cairo speech denying
any legitimacy to Israel's settlements, Mr Netanyahu forced himself to utter the words ""Palestinian state"" — but he
surrounded them with barbed-wire caveats that voided them of meaning.
Indeed, the words all sides use — peace, resolution, security, and so on — may be the same; but what each side means by
them is different.
The mainstream Palestinian leaders, President Mahmoud Abbas and Salem Fayyad, the prime minister, and the Quartet
made up of the US, the European Union, the UN and Russia, talk of a negotiated resolution. This means two states living
in peace and security, and a Palestinian homeland on the 22 per cent of Mandate Palestine taken by Israel in the 1967
Arab-Israeli war. East Jerusalem would serve as the capital of the West Bank and Gaza, with marginal land swaps to
preserve some Israeli settlements near Jerusalem. But what does Mr Netanyahu mean?
He has been most clear on what he does not mean. For a start, he has set his face against any concessions on
Jerusalem. He wants to keep most settlements except for the far-flung ""ideological"" ones and the 100-plus ""outposts""
established as pawns to be traded once the chess game began. His idea of a demilitarised Palestinian state is more like a
sort of supra-municipal administration than a self-determined, independent government.
Will he surprise us, on the hackneyed Nixon and China principle that holds it is politicians of the right who most easily
close difficult deals? There is little to suggest that:
The thinking of Mr Netanyahu, son of a celebrated promoter of Greater Israel, has always been profoundly irredentist.
While his nationalist Likud faces the constraints of being in coalition with an assortment of ultra-rightist and ultra-orthodox
parties as well as Labour, that was plainly his choice; the centrist Kadima party was (and remains) an alternative. To be
fair, Israel's electoral system — with a low threshold for entry into the Knesset that makes multi-party coalitions inevitable —
means lobbies such as the settlers can take the national interest hostage. But Mr Netanyahu magnifies this by his choice
of partners and by diligently firing up the ultra-hawks in the pro-Israel lobby in the US.
As risks he. has taken for peace, Exhibit A is the much-hyped moratorium on settlement-building, which expires next
month and has, in any case, been speciously interpreted. While the bulldozers to build settlements have been idling,
moreover, the bulldozers demolishing Palestinian homes have been roaring: the rate of demolition in and around
Jerusalem has doubled this year, while the army has just razed the village of al-Farisiye in the Jordan Valley, in line with
Mr Netanyahu's strategically obsolete obsession with keeping the valley as Israel's eastern border.
As diplomacy struggles to keep alive the viability of a two-state solution, three rival systems of control have crystallised in
the occupied territories that would make up a future Palestinian homeland: the settlements; the crimped Palestinian
Authority of Mr Abbas and Mr Fayyad; and then Hamas, which Israel and its Arab and western allies have tried and failed
to marginalise. Time is short for a negotiated outcome; it may even have run out.
The outlines of a deal are clear, in the (Bill) Clinton parameters of 2000 and Arab Peace initiative of 2002, endorsed by 22
Arab and 57 Muslim countries (as well as Hamas, as part of the 2007 Mecca accord). There has to be an end to the
occupation, and the US and Quartet cannot just allude to this; they must demand it.
The writer is international affairs editor
""FT"" and ""Financial Times"" are trademarks of the Financial Times. Prjyacy pplicyI Terris
© Copyright The Financial Times, Ltd 2010."
6073,"Thanks so much -- for your leadership and friendship and for the opportunity to be part of this great team.
All best.
Jack"
6074,Ok
6075,"III let lauren handle
Ops can schedule menendez to lock in"
6076,"With 97 percent of the precincts counted, Quinn and Bill Brady Were separated by three-tenths of a percentage point —
roughly 11,100 votes out of 3.57 million cast."
6078,"Maybe. And, of course, worth the effort. Without an effort, the two state solution is dead; if failed, on the other hand, also
dead. Another idea, don't know if it can be made to work: How to introduce Israel entering the NPT and ending its nuclear
ambiguity, which is its state policy, but which itself is the model for Iran now. Can this issue be used profitably in
negotiations, a wild card, as it were? Can options be developed on whether it can, how it might work, potential effect on
peace process? Israel's nuclear ambiguity policy is certainly a big issue coming given Iran. See below from Haaretz today:
• Home
• Print Edition
• Nt-
-
3ws
• Published 00:56 26.08.10
• Latest update 00:56 26.08.10
Interview / Why Israel should end its policy of
nuclear ambiguity
An interview with Avner Cohen, expert on nonproliferation
issues and author of the forthcoming book ""The Worst-Kept
Secret: Israel's Bargain with the Bomb.""
By Nia.
tasha Mozwvava Tags: Israel news
Avner Cohen is a senior fellow of the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies at the Monterey Institute of
International Studies. He is the author of ""Israel and the Bomb"" and the forthcoming ""The Worst-Kept Secret: Israel's
Bargain with the Bomb.""
Avner Cohen, you claim that the time has come for Israel to abandon its policy of nuclear ambiguity. Why now,
and why would that be good for Israel?
""Nuclear ambiguity is a cornerstone of Israeli strategic thinking. It was born many years ago, and sealed as part of a
comprehensive deal with the United States in 1969. It was appropriate at the time, but today. in my opinion, it is not just
anachronistic, but foolish and anti-democratic. Even in realpolitik terms, it is an 'own goal' for Israel. In my view, it
undermines genuine Israeli interests, including the need to gain recognition and legitimacy and to be counted among the
responsible states in this strategic field.""
Are you sure the pressure on Israel is so severe? If Israel is criticized over its nuclear program, its usually
marginal. The brunt of the criticism is over its treatment of the Palestinians. •
""Israel received tacit consent for its nuclear program from the Western world because it appeared to be a small, just state'
surrounded by enemies, and the memory of the Holocaust was still fresh. Israel's image was different then.
""In the long term, the more Israel appears to reject peace and to be the one that opposes a two-state solution, the more it
will be perceived as a regional bully that possesses nuclear weapons. So the world will be a lot less forgiving on the
nuclear issue. The situation of ambiguity, in which you don't have real legitimacy, is not a good place to be.""
The United States has called on Israel to join the nonproliferation treaty, but during Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu's visit to Washington, U.S. President Barack Obama said he recognizes the special nature of the
threats Israel faces, and these threats warrant special security measures.
The Americans want to appear just and fair because the issue is seen in Israel as completely sacred. They want to look
as though they respect that. This agreement [with the U.S.] has been passed along from president to president, but I don't
believe this issue is as sacred to Americans as it is to Israelis.""
Do you give credence to the slippery slope theory, under which abandoning ambiguity would lead to demands
that Israel disarm?
""Those are cliches used by the defense establishment. Nobody 'demands that Israel make such an announcement without
first doing the preparatory work among its allies and the Arab states. This great fear of a slippery slope is ridiculous. Israel
has its own interests; nobody can coerce it to do things.""
What about the claim that ambiguity is what keeps the Arab states from feeling a need to launch an arms race
against Israel?
""I don't dismiss that claim out of hand, and if, after study and thought, this fear turns out to be warranted, I would be
prepared to wait. But in some ways, ambiguity is insulting to the Arabs. The claim you mention treats Arabs as though
they were children: If they are told that Israel doesn't admit to it, that frees them of the need to deal with the reality. I
believe the Arab countries don't want to play a game of make-believe, but rather want to discuss the topic directly and
realistically.""
You say, basically, that Iran is imitating Israel's nuclear behavior. That comparison would certainly rankle Israel
supporters.
""But the way Iran has advanced toward nuclear capability is not via announcements and tests, but rather by rumors. It can
even remain within the bounds of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. If that rankles anybody, let it rankle.
""If Iran is not attacked, it will want to achieve a status of ambiguity; I see this as nearly certain. The international
community thus has another reason not to accept the idea of ambiguity as legitimate. The norm that a state with a nuclear
weapon must say so clearly is part of the nonproliferation regime. The longer Iran continues down this path, the less
patience the world will have for Israel.""
How do you envision the scenario of 'coming out of the nuclear closet?'
""Censorship plays a very central role in the enforcement of nuclear ambiguity. So long as there is a [military] censor, it is
very hard to alter ambiguity. If censorship didn't exist, israeli newspapers would be able to write about the subject more
openly.
""Another issue is the need for a law that addresses the nuclear topic. There is a Shin Bet [security service] law, but there
is no law for the Mossad and no law for the Israel Atomic Energy Commission. This is a very problematic situation.
""On the international level, it's a sensitive subject that demands preparatory work. Ultimately, I see a political statement by
Israel's government in which the prime minister would find the right way to put this subject on the table. He would talk
about the historical background and the responsible way Israel has dealt with this topic. With a few rare exceptions, these
weapons have no military use; Israel views them as a means of deterrence. I don't think Israel would need to go into detail
regarding how many [bombs] it has or exactly what it has.
""Israel has a right to the bomb no less than New Delhi, or even the United States. Ambiguity creates a sense that we are
sinners, as though we had done something so terrible that we can't tell the awful truth - and I don't think it is so awful. This
is a country that the world has viewed as a nuclear state for a long time, and the time has come for it to say something
positive on this huge, complicated and awe-inspiring topic...
""All these states are ultimately committed under the treaty they signed to achieve a world without nuclear weapons.
Whether that will happen in our lifetimes I can't say.""
You say ambiguity undermines Israeli democracy and prevents debate on matters of life and death, such as the
question of whose finger will be on the button. Do you think the Israeli public is ready for such a discussion?
""There has been very little creative thinking in this area, and ambiguity is one of the stifling factors that have produced an
unacceptable, closed culture incapable of creative thinking. Ambiguity's power derives from the fact that Israeli society
accepts it, and it seems to the public that any attempt to deviate from it would cause serious damage to Israeli security.
""Ambiguity has created a public incapable of dealing with the topic, one that is afraid of it and prefers the issue to be
handled by 'trustworthy hands' so that it does not have to take responsibility itself.
Ambiguity has created an ignorant, craven public.which, in a certain sense, has betrayed its civic, democratic duties on
this subject.""
What's it like researching a topic nobody discusses?
""When I started studying this subject 25 years ago, I had the feeling I was entering a palace where nothing could be
touched. It took me years to find the right way to handle the topic responsibly - from a researcher's perspective, not from
the standpoint of someone who is directly involved in the matter.
Today I think it is possible to initiate a meaningful dialogue about concrete, real issues.""
• Print Page
• Send to a friend.
• Comments
• Share
• Text Size -1-1:
• Follow us on Twitter
• Become a Haaretz.com Faceboolr friend
This story is by:
• atasha Mozoovaya"
6079,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, October 14, 2010 7:37 AM
Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; H
FW: Jake and Huma on Time's 40 under 40"
6081,Ok will work on those and get back to you asap
6084,Calling now
6085,"Fyi
10/13/2035"
6086,"Just as I put those guys back on the front foot - this came in.
Look forward to discussing."
6087,"Martin Indyk is free for the next 40 minutes. I can connect him to your blackberry whenever you're ready. I'm still
working on Menendez and Wexler."
6089,"FYI - you probably know this, but..."
6092,"Valenzuela, Arturo A <ValenzuelaAA@state.gov>
Friday, October 1, 2010 7:34 AM
Gonzalez, Juan S; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma; Steinberg, James B; Burns, William J
From Arturo - Correa Rescued in Ecuador
Madame Secretary: After a tense day in which President Correa was slightly injured at noon by rioting and
striking police, and later was barred from leaving the hospital by the same, the army finally rescued him at
9pm last night. Some military units, including the Navy unit in Guayaquil appeared to support the police. The
police also occupied the national congress. As the rescue took place, the head of the Ecuadoran Joints Chiefs
of Staff issued a statement supporting the president, and noting that the armed forces respect the rule of law
""in which the President [Rafael Correa] is the maximum authority of the three branches."" Things are now
calm.
Reaction in the hemisphere was one of deep concern. The OAS adopted a resolution; South American
presidents at the call of UNASUR travelled to Buenos Aires and are likely to go on to Quito to support
Correa. Several, including Garcia and Santos, called Correa. Zapatero also spoke with him. Moratinos tried to
reach you at around 6pm last evening to convey that news, I took the call.
As you know, we issued a statement of support for Correa. I also gave an interview to CNN in Spanish, which
was re-played frequently. I strongly recommend that you call Correa today to reiterate U.S. support for his
government and to wish him well.
He will appreciate it but, more broadly, it sends a signal that the United States supports the constitutional
order and rejects any attempt to undermine it. Chavez in Buenos Aires predictably declared that we were
behind the unrest. We have prepared a call sheet for you.
Regards,
Arturo"
6094,"they update as of 840 pm is that the ball is in their court as they weigh the deal with shas and our concerns. dan
will talk to molho and/or dermer very late tonight our time/first thing sunday there. i'll send you an update early
in the morning.
>"
6095,"another wrinkle -- uzi arad gave an interview saying we have now given them written assurances, possibly
laying the groundwork for a vote tomorrow BEFORE we have worked through the remaining issues. they may
have decided to just go for it. dan will follow up.
On Sat, Nov 20, 2010 at 8:41 PM, Jake Sullivan < > Wrote:
they update as of 840 pm is that the ball is in their court as they weigh the deal with shas and our
concerns. dan will talk to molho and/or dermer very late tonight our time/first thing sunday there. i'll send you
an update early in the morning.
>"
6098,Jeff mentioned we are helping expedite visas for delegation.
6100,"behavior.Washington Post.doc
You almost certainly have seen this, but just in case. AM"
6102,"He is getting on a short flight this morning, and can do anytime between 1:30-5:30 PM this afternoon. Let me know if
you'd like me to set a time."
6103,"He prefers 2:00 PM. I have locked it in and will connect to you at that time.
Will report back to you soon on the other two."
6104,What should I tell him?
6105,"Robert Wexler can do 1:30 PM ET. (He is currently on the west coast).
Good for you? Then lndyk at 2PM.
Still no word back from Menendez, but we are still trying."
6106,"Great, I will connect them to your blackberry at those times."
6107,"Okay, in that same 1:30-2:30 window? Or now?"
6108,Will do.
6109,Will do
6110,"Coming up in 10 minutes:
Wexler at 1:30 PM
Indyk at 2:00 PM
###"
6111,". Subject: H: fyi, to discuss when you come up for air... Sid
http://www.newsweek.com/2010/04/15/europe-s-new-politics-of-fear.print.html
Europe's New Politics of Fear
by Denis MacShaneApril 16, 2010
There is a new divide in Europe. Not an iron curtain, but an iron intolerance as politicians revert to blaming minorities for
their nations' woes. In Western Europe it is Muslims. In Eastern Europe they are Jews, Roma, and gays. In the
Netherlands, Geert Wilders surged to an election victory in March on the back of anti-Muslim, anti-Quran populism. In
Hungary the Fidesz Party won big in recent elections with attacks on ""Jewish capital... which wants to devour the entire
world."" To the right of Fidesz is the openly anti-Jewish Jobbik Party, which won just two seats fewer than the Socialists. Its
leaders want to wear the neo-Nazi uniform of the pre-1939 Hungarian Guard when they take their seats in Budapest's
Parliament.
Contemporary political scientists do not like to highlight anti-Semitism. They prefer the term ""radical populism,"" but to
anyone with half a sense of European history, the parallels with an older, Jew-baiting politics can no longer be dismissed.
Economic dislocation and a rapid loss of confidence in traditional politics gave rise to ultranationalist movements in the
first half of the last century. Now a global recession and the hunt for someone to blame as jobs and incomes disappear is
producing the same toxic politics.
The Fidesz leader, Viktor Orban, was a youthful evangelist for liberalized open markets after 1990. Now he strikes a much
more nationalist tone. His Socialist opponents had to accept an austerity IMF package. Unlike Greece—which is being
helped, so far, by its euro-zone partners—Hungary was alone as boom-time euro loans to buy houses and cars had to be
paid back in an ever-devaluing forint. Blaming the Socialist government, globalization, and international capital was easy.
But Fidesz went further. In a bid for votes on the far right, a Fidesz parliamentarian, Oszkar Molnar, says it's time to give
""primacy to Hungarian interests over those of global capital, Jewish capital.""
Like Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front in France, Jobbik has the support of about 15 percent of Hungarian voters. The
Czech right-wing ODS Party has had to dismiss its leader, former premier Mirek Topolanek, after he attacked the Jewish
origins of the current Czech prime minister and castigated the gay transport minister. In a new book, The Populist Radical
Right in Poland, the Oxford-educated Warsaw political professor Rafal Pankowski writes: ""Antisemitism is crucial to the
Polish populist right. The number of Jews in Poland today is minimal, but the anti-Jewish prejudice serves as a code for a
general hostility to diversity and to Polish [liberal] democracy."" For the time being, criticism of nationalist politics is
suspended as Poles mourn President Lech Kaczynski and other national leaders killed in the air-crash tragedy this month.
But the record of his party activists—including Michal Kaminski, Poland's best-known M.E.P. and leader of a small right-
wing group in the Strasbourg Parliament—is disturbing. An admirer of the late Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet,
Kaminski uses ugly language about gays, and says he will apologize for the killing of Jews on Polish soil in World War II
when ""Jews apologize for killing Poles.""
Mainstream political parties have sought to play down the rise of minority bashing. But Fidesz is affiliated with the center-
right European People's Party, which groups Angela Merkel's ruling Christian Democratic Union Party in Germany,
Nicolas Sarkozy's Union for a Popular Movement government in France, and ruling conservative parties in Sweden, Italy,
and Belgium. When Austrian rightist Jorg Haider entered a coalition in Austria a decade ago, the European Union held
Vienna in a political quarantine until Haider was removed. But Fidesz has a massive majority built on attacking ""Jewish
capital"" in language even Haider didn't dare utter.
So radical populism—anti-Muslim in Western Europe, anti-Jewish in Eastern Europe, and anti-foreigner and anti-
immigrant rhetoric everywhere—is no longer fringe politics. In Britain's general election, all the main parties are seeking to
appease anti-foreigner feeling with language on immigrants that they would not tolerate if applied to British citizens living
and working abroad. Comparisons with prewar Europe should not be overdrawn. Fascism is dead and not coming back.
But a new politics of intolerance is afoot in Europe, and no one knows how to deal with it.
http://www.newsweek.com/2010/09/05/how-marine-le-pen-is-changing-french-politics.print.html
B6
Eit
What a Tea Party Looks Like in Europe
Marine Le Pen is moving her father's rabble-rousing, far-right
party away from the fringe, and redefining French politics in
the process.
by Tracy McNicoll and Christopher DickeySeptember 05, 2010
amuel Bollendorff / The New York Times-Redux
Marine Le Pen is the heir apparent to the leadership of the National Front, the right-wing party her father Jean-Marie (left)
leads today
Jean-Marie Le Pen, the 82-year-old firebrand of France's far right—the man who for decades has played on the inchoate
fears, xenophobia, knee-jerk racism, and ill-disguised anti-Semitism of many of his supporters—had just finished speaking
to the faithful on a farm not far from the English Channel. As members of the youth wing of his National Front party
feasted on barbecue and apple pie, they were thrilled to see the grand old man hold forth, still the ""provocateur"" taunting
the establishment, the ""toreador"" who hides the sword in his cape and lets the press run at him like a bull. Even these
youngsters knew, however, that Jean-Marie's time in the ring is nearing an end. The old man himself made it clear he's.
determined to step down. All eyes this day were on his daughter Marine. ""She has the will, the courage, the temperament
necessary, and the competence,"" Le Pen told reporters at the farmhouse. ""It seems to me indisputable that she is our
camp's best candidate for 2012.""
Tall, blonde, plain-spoken, and thick-skinned, Le Pen's youngest child, at 42, is the heir apparent to his party. She's
expected to win the contest for its leadership in January, and she's a passionate advocate of its core message: strong
French nationalism, relentless Euro-skepticism, and a lot of hard-nosed talk about fighting crime and immigration. She's a
fresh face, a new look, and, with rising poll numbers placing her third in a crowded field of possible 2012 candidates, a
new threat in French politics. In the eyes of many, she's more effective—and thus more dangerous—than her father.
It's a measure of the Le Pens' enhanced power that they've managed to push President Nicolas Sarkozy to the right and
cast their own party as mainstream. Over the summer, Sarkozy essentially gave up his flirtation with the left, which began
after his election in 2007. He had cherry-picked popular Socialists for his centrist government, dividing their party. But in
elections this past March, Sarkozy's UMP party managed to keep control of only one out of 22 regional governments. So
he decided to swing back to the right by playing on fears about public safety and immigration. He proposed taking
citizenship away from some criminals of immigrant background and launched a campaign against Roma (or ""Gypsies""),
booting hundreds out of the country. While the measures proved popular in opinion polls, Sarkozy, ironically, did not. His
abysmal approval ratings remain in the low 30s.
The younger Le Pen takes great pleasure in watching Sarkozy squirm. ""I think I get on [his] nerves quite a bit,"" she says.
""My profile is much more complicated for him to deal with than that of my father."" The old man could be painted as a
creature of the past, a purveyor of old prejudices with a ""sulfurous"" reputation, says Marine. Today, however, the Front
wants to bill itself as ""neither left nor right."" If that means losing some fringe elements (many of whom support Marine's
rival, Bruno Gollnisch), well, ""tent pis,"" she says.
Other right-wing movements in Europe are also pushing into the political mainstream. The government of Prime Minister
Silvio Berlusconi in Italy has long relied on its alliance with two groups that used to be considered extreme—one of them
the former Fascist Party under Gianfranco Fini, the other the secessionist Northern League of Umberto Bossi. A falling-out
between Berlusconi and Fini has left Bossi as the current kingmaker in Italian politics. In the Netherlands, the militantly
Islamophobic Geert Wilders won enough seats in the last elections to become a pivotal figure in the drawn-out process of
trying to build a new coalition government.
Yet these movements often differ in significant ways from the right wing that's made in the U.S.A. Put aside the usual
caricature of ""people in pointy hoods and the Ku Klux Klan,"" Marine Le Pen says, and she still believes ""the American right
is much more to the right than the National Front."" She might agree with those who want to manage American frontiers
more effectively and prevent massive illegal immigration, but she's also a big believer in the state's ability and obligation
to help its people. ""We feel the state should have the means to intervene,"" she says. ""We are very attached to public
services A la frangaise as a way to limit the inequalities among regions and among the French,"" including ""access for all to
the same level of health care.""
Le Pen grew up in a household that was all politics all the time, with her father the object of sometimes violent attacks by
competing factions on the right, as well as by the left. When Marine was just 8, someone set off a 20-kilo bomb in the
family's Paris apartment building. Miraculously, no one was killed or seriously injured, but the front of the building was
brought down. The crime has never been solved. ""The worst part wasn't just the attack, it was that not a single politician
sent a word of condolence,"" she says. ""It was difficult, but it builds character, it hardens you.""
That's a real asset in political life anywhere. If Sarkozy finds himself facing off against Marine Le Pen in the presidential
race a year and a half from now, he may find himself wishing her old man had stayed around a little longer.
With Barbie Nadeau in Rome"
6112,"FYI
The Christian Science Monitor - CSMonitor.com
War on terror: Obama softened the language, but
hardened Muslim hearts
The Obama administration's shift in counterterrorism language sought to bridge the divide with the Muslim world and soften Americans' fear of
Islam. But the new rhetoric hasn't matched policy, and the unintended costs at home and abroad have been high.
By Stuart Gottlieb
posted October 14, 2010 at 9:58 am EDT
New Haven, Conn. —
One of the most defining aspects of the Obama administration's counterterrorism strategy has been its effort to change America's rhetorical approach
to the threat of terrorism, particularly Islamic terrorism. ""The language we use matters,"" President Obama told the Arabic satellite television station
Al Arabiya in an interview during his first week in office. Scrubbed were George W. Bush-era terms like ""war on terrorism,"" ""radical Islam,"" and
""jihadist.""The White House's 2010 National Security Strategy formally replaced the term ""Islamic terrorism"" with ""violent extremism.""
The purpose of the shift in semantics was two-fold.
First, it aimed to repackage the fight against terrorism as a specific fight against Al Qaeda, not against Islamic extremism, which Mr. Obama believes
contributed to a post-9/11 perception that America was ""at war with Islam."" Indeed, the new rhetoric has gone hand in hand with Obama's outreach to
the Muslim world to build ""a new partnership based on mutual respect and mutual interest.""
Second, it was part of a broader effort to soften Americans' fear of Islamic terrorism, which Obama officials believe plays directly into the hands of
extremists.
Language change ineffective
Now it is fair to ask whether Obama's use of language regarding terrorism has proven effective. Startling new polls suggest it hasn't. The first, by the
Brookings Institution in Washington, shows that between May 2009 and May 2010 the number of Middle Eastern Arabs expressing optimism in
Obama's approach toward their region dropped from 51 percent to just 16 percent, with those describing themselves as ""discouraged"" by the Obama
presidency rising from 15 percent to 63 percent.
The second, by the Pew Research Center, shows that in August 2010 fewer Americans held a favorable view of Islam (30 percent) than five years
earlier during the Bush administration (41 percent), with more Americans (35 percent) saying Islam encourages violence more than other religions
(in 2002, it was 25 percent).
These starkly negative trend lines suggest the limited utility of language in fighting terrorism. Yes, terrorism is a propaganda-fueled activity – an
ongoing battle to win hearts and minds and attract new recruits to fight for the cause. And of course the language used in combating terrorism is vital
– the counterproductive ""smoke 'em out"" rhetoric of the Bush administration is a case in point.
But if rhetoric does not match policy, or appears to discount or play down threats, the credibility – and thus effectiveness – of the overall
counterterrorism strategy may be undermined. It appears the Obama administration has dug itself into just such a hole.
Rhetoric doesn't match policy
When looking beyond the nuanced language and appealing promises, what Muslims around the world see is an administration that has ramped up the
war in Afghanistan; is killing scores of Muslim civilians with drone strikes; continues to hold more than 1,000 Muslim detainees in Guantanamo,
Bagram, and other prisons; and maintains seemingly unconditional support of Israel.
This is not to critique these policies, but to point out that they do not match the raised expectations of the Muslim world and have only muddled
Obama's oft-stated goal of turning Muslims toward America and away from extremist movements.
The price of downplaying the threat
A large price is also being paid domestically for disconnected rhetoric. Despite maintaining nearly all of Bush's hard-line tactics — the USA Patriot
Act, warrantless surveillance, indefinite detentions the White House has consistently played down the threat, even in the face of a clear uptick in
terrorism activity.
For example, following the failed 2009 Christmas Day airline bombing, Obama described the suspect as an ""isolated extremist,"" despite his ties to Al
Qaeda. And the administration's initial response to the failed May 2010 Times Square bombing by an American Muslim trained in Pakistan was to
call it a ""one-off' event. Attorney General Eric Holder stated in congressional testimony that he believed these and other recent Islamic terror plots
were unconnected, and unrelated to radical Islam.
There is little doubt that the administration's unwillingness to speak candidly about Islamic terrorism has taken a toll on the public's trust. A Gallup
poll released last month shows Americans favoring Republicans over Democrats on the issue of terrorism 55 percent to 31 percent — up from 49
percent to 42 percent last fall.
Time to reverse the trend
Obama entered office promising to fight a smarter and more effective war on terrorism, and in many ways he has. His instincts to maintain aggressive
tactics while toning down inflammatory rhetoric were sound. Yet his administration seems to have overlearned a key lesson of the Bush years — that
overstating the threat of terrorism has costs attached. So, too, does rhetoric that understates the threat, especially when detached from policy.
It is not too late to reverse this troubling trend. The White House can begin by focusing less on overly reassuring rhetoric — which has not paid
dividends at home or abroad — and more on a candid accounting of the threats faced and the policies employed to confront them.
Stuart Gottlieb, a former foreign-policy adviser and speechwriter in the US Senate (1999-2003), is now director of policy studies at the Jackson Insti
tute for Global Affairs at Yale. He's the editor of ""Debating Terrorism and Counterterrorism: Con filo ting Perspectives on Causes, Contexts, and Re
sponses."" The original version of this piece appeared in the online edition of The National Interest.
© The Christian Science Monitor. All Rights Reserved. Terms under which this service is provided to you. Privacy Policy."
6113,"Menendez's staff has finally gotten back to us. They cay he can do a call between 5:00 — 5:30 PM today or after 7:00 PM
today.
Lauren"
6114,"MS:
Blair is available tmw (Friday, 8/27) between 11AM and 12 Noon, or Saturday morning.
Lauren"
6115,"MS — I've heard back from Armitage and Wexler offices. Here are all of your pending calls in one e-mail:
-Tony Blair: asking to speak with you btw 11AM-12 Noon tomorrow (Friday), or sometime Saturday morning.
- Fmr. Dep. Sec Armitage: Available at 3:15 PM today or 12 noon tomorrow (Friday).
- Menenedez: Available between 5-5:30 PM today, or after 7:00 PM today.
- Robert Wexler: Available anytime after 4:30 PM today, or anytime tomorrow.
Just let me know if you would like for me to lock anything in.
###"
6117,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence
En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:30 am WEEKLY MEETING w/UN AMBASSADOR SUSAN RICE
10:00 am Secretary's Office
10:00 am YITZHAK MOLCHO PRE-BRIEF*
11:00 am Secretary's Outer Office
11:00 am MEETING w/ISRAELI CHIEF NEGOTIATOR YITZHAK MOLCHO
11:45 am Secretary's Outer Office
12:00 pm CALL w/FRENCH PRESIDENT NICOLAS SARKOZY
12:15 pm Secretary's Office
12:30 pm OFFICE TIME
1:30 pm Secretary's Office
1:55 pm (t) DEPART State Department
En route Andrews Air Force Base
2:20 pm (t) ARRIVE Andrews Air Force Base (AAB)
2:30 pm (t) WHEELS UP Andrews Air Force Base via Mil Air Tail#60500
En route San Francisco, California
5:00 pm (t) ARRIVE San Francisco International Airport (SFO)
5:10 pm (t) DEPART San Francisco International Airport
En route San Francisco Marriott
5:40 pm (t) ARRIVE San Francisco Marriott
6:30 pm OPTIONAL: DROP BY COMMONWEALTH CLUB MEET AND GREET
7:00 pm Salon 14, San Francisco Marriott
7:00 pm COMMONWEALTH CLUB FORUM
8:00 pm Ballroom, San Francisco Marriott
8:00 pm DEPART San Francisco Marriott
En route Private Residence
9:15 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
6118,"Fyi - Prince is working with Dermer to get a common line.
Meanwhile, I just watched my first ever women's field hockey game - Maryland beat UNC to win the national
championship."
6120,ok
6121,"Lauren Jiloty <
Friday, October 1, 2010 8:22 AM
H; valenzuelaaa@state.gov; Huma Abedin
RE: From Arturo - Correa Rescued in Ecuador
yes will do
>"
6122,"MyQ
Map & Directions
Directory
Contact Us
Search
INFORMATION:
For Alumni
For Parents
For News Media
01:
,?rint this page
Home> Institutes and Centers> Quinnipiac University Polling Institute> National (US)> Release Detail
November 22, 2010 - American Voters Could Deny Obama Reelection, Quinnipiac University National
Poll Finds; President Tied With Romney, Huckabee But Leads Palin
Word format
President Barack Obama does not deserve a second term, American voters say 49 - 43 percent, and he is in a
statistical dead heat with possible Republican challengers Mitt Romney and Mike Huckabee, according to a
Quinnipiac University poll released today. President Obama leads Sarah Palin 48 - 40 percent.
Romney, Huckabee, Palin and former House Speaker Newt Gingrich are bunched together when Republican
voters are asked who they prefer for the GOP's 2012 presidential nomination, the independent Quinnipiac
(KWIN-uh-pe-ack) University survey finds.
Democratic voters say 64 - 27 percent they do not want anyone to challenge President Obama for their party's
nomination in 2012.
""The Democratic base remains squarely behind President Barack Obama when it comes to his re-election, but
his weakness among independent voters at this point makes his 2012 election prospects uncertain,"" said Peter
A. Brown, assistant director of the Quinnipiac University Polling Institute.
""The demographic splits in the electorate when voters are asked whether the president deserves a second term is
a roadmap for his re-election strategists on how they need to focus their appeal. Only 39 percent of men, 34
percent of whites, 35 percent of political independents and 38 percent of those over age 35 think he deserves
four more years in the Oval Office.""
In trial heats for 2012, former Massachusetts Gov. Romney receives 45 percent to 44 percent for Obama, while
the president gets 46 percent to 44 percent for Mr. Huckabee. Matched against Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels, a
virtual unknown to most voters, the president leads 45 - 36 percent.
""At this point, former Alaska Gov. Palin runs the worst against President Obama. Daniels is essentially a
generic Republican because of his anonymity to most voters. Obama only gets 45 percent against him while he
gets 48 percent against Ms. Palin,"" said Brown. ""She is very unpopular among independents and although she
recently said she thought she could defeat Obama, the data does not now necessarily support that assertion.""
""Unlike Daniels, who is a political unknown to most Americans, virtually all voters have formed an opinion
about Palin and that opinion is not encouraging for her candidacy.""
Ms. Palin is viewed the most negatively by the American people of the possible Republican candidates in 2012.
She is viewed unfavorable by 51 percent of voters and favorably by 36 percent. Among independents, the key
swing voting bloc, she has a negative 54 - 33 percent favorability rating.
Huckabee gets a 41 - 25 percent favorability rating and Romney gets a 38 - 26 percent score. Former U.S.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich gets a negative 30 - 43 percent score.
Obama gets a 48 - 48 percent split overall, with a negative 43 - 52 percent among independent voters.
In a mythical Republican primary Ms. Palin gets 19 percent, including 25 percent of GOP women, followed by
Romney with 18 percent, Huckabee at 17 percent, Gingrich at 15 percent, Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty at 6
percent and Daniels, Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour and Sen. John Thune of South Dakota at 2 percent each.
""The best thing Obama has going for him when it comes to his re-election may be that at this point the
Republicans don't have a candidate who is both nationally well-known and well- liked by a majority of voters,""
said Brown.
From November 8 - 15, Quinnipiac University surveyed 2,424 registered voters nationwide, live by telephone,
with a margin of error of +/- 2 percentage points.
The Quinnipiac University Poll, directed by Douglas Schwartz, Ph.D., conducts public opinion surveys in
Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Florida, Ohio and the nation as a public service and for
research. For more data or RSS feed- http://www.quinnipiac.edu/polling.xml, call (203) 582-5201
begin_of the_skype_highlighting (203) 582-5201 end_of the_skype_highlighting, or follow us on
Twitter.
1. (Republicans and Republican Leaners) It is a long way off but I would like to ask you some questions about
the 2012 Presidential election. If the 2012 Republican primary for President were being held today, and the
candidates were: Sarah Palin, Mike Huckabee, Newt Gingrich, Mitt Romney, Mitch Daniels, Tim Pawlenty,
Haley Barbour, and John Thune for whom would you vote?
REPUBLICANS
WHITE
NoColl Coll BrnAgn
Tot Men Worn Degree Degree Evngl Prot Cath
Palin 19% 14% 25% 22% 10% 20% 16% 20%
Huckabee 17 17 18 17 18 26 22 13
Gingrich 15 18 11 15 15 13 16 16
Romney 18 20 15 14 26 13 14 22
Daniels 2 3 2 2 3 2 1 3
Pawlenty 6 6 5 6 6 6 7 6
Barbour 2 3 1 1 4 2 2 1
Thune 2 2 1 1 3 1 1 2
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 1 1 1 1 2 - - 3
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
DK/NA 17 15 19 19 13 14 20 14
2. (Democrats and Democrat Leaners) It is a long way off but I would like to ask you some questions about the
2012 Presidential election. Would you like to see a candidate other than Barack Obama run for the Democratic
nomination for President in 2012 or not?
DEMOCRATS
NoColl Coll
Tot Men Worn Wht Blk Degree Degree
Yes 27% 30% 25% 32% 13% 32% 16%
No 64 62 65 59 83 58 76
OK/NA 9 8 10 10 4 10 9
3. Turning to the November 2012 general election for President, if the 2012 election for President were being
held today, and the candidates were, Barack Obama the Democrat and Sarah Palin the Republican for whom
would you vote?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Obama 48% 6% 89% 44% 44% 52% 41% 91% 60%
Palin 40 85 6 37 44 36 47 1 31
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 4 3 2 8 5 3 5 2 -
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 3 3 1 6 4 3 3 1 6
OK/NA 4 3 2 6 3 6 4 4 3
AGE IN YRS INCOME POL PHIL
18-34 35-54 55+ <50 50-100 >100K Lib Mod Con
Obama 62% 44% 45% 54% 48% 44% 86% 63% 17%
Palin 30 43 42 35 42 46 9 22 72
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 4 4 3 3 4 5 2 5 4
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 2 4 4 3 3 3 2 4 3
DR/NA 2 5 4 5 3 2 1 5 4
WHITE
NoColl Coll BrnAgn
Degree Degree Evngl Prot Cath
Obama 46% 56% 23% 31% 39%
Palin 42 33 67 58 48
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 4 4 4 5 5
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 4 3 2 2 4
DR/NA 5 3 4 4 4
4, If the 2012 election for President were being held today, and the candidates were, Barack Obama the
Democrat and Mitt Romney the Republican for whom would you vote?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Obama 44% 3% 86% 35% 40% 48% 37% 87% 60%
Romney 45 91 8 46 51 39 53 3 32
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 2 2 1 3 2 1 2 - -
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 2 1 1 4 2 2 2 3 2
DK/NA 7 3 5 12 5 9 7 7 7
AGE IN YRS INCOME POL PHIL
18-34 35-54 55+ <50 50-100 >100K Lib Mod Con
Obama 59% 40% 41% 50% 44% 38% 81% 56% 15%
Romney 34 48 48 37 49 54 11 32 75
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 1 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 2
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 1 3 2 2 - 3 1 1 3
DK/NA 6 7 7 8 6 4 5 9 5
WHITE
NoColl Coll BrnAgn
Degree Degree Evngl Prot Cath
Obama 42% 51% 19% 26% 34%
Romney 46 42 69 64 53
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 2 1 3 2 2
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 2 1 2 2 2
DK/NA 8 4 7 6 9
5. If the 2012 election for President were being held today, and the candidates were, Barack Obama the
Democrat and Mike Huckabee the Republican for whom would you vote?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Bik His
Obama 46% 4% 85% 40% 42% 49% 38% 90% 64%
Huckabee 44 88 9 47 49 40 52 5 26
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 2 2 1 4 3 1 2 - 1
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 2 1 - 3 2 1 2 1 2
DK/NA 6 4 5 7 4 8 6 4 7
AGE IN YRS INCOME POL PHIL
18-34 35-54 55+ <50 50-100 >100K Lib Mod Con
Obama 60% 41% 43% 51% 44% 42% 84% 59% 16%
Huckabee 34 48 46 38 48 52 10 29 76
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 2 2 2 2 1 2 1 3 2
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) - 2 2 2 1 2 - 2 2
OK/NA 4 6 7 7 5 2 4 8 5
1
1
I
WHITE
NoColl Coll BrnAgn
Degree Degree Evngl Prot Cath
Obama 43% 52% 21% 27% 36%
Huckabee 46 40 72 66 52
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 2 2 2 2 2
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 2 1 1 1 3
DK/NA 7 5 5 5 7
6. If the 2012 election for President were being held today, and the candidates were, Barack Obama the
Democrat and Mitch Daniels the Republican for whom would you vote?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Obama 45% 6% 85% 37% 42% 49% 38% 84% 66%
Daniels 36 78 5 34 39 32 42 3 22
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 2 2 1 4 3 2 3 1 1
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 3 2 1 4 3 2 3 1 2
DK/NA 14 12 8 21 13 15 15 10 9
AGE IN YRS INCOME POL PHIL
18-34 35-54 55+ <50 50-100 >100K Lib Mod Con
Obama 58% 42% 42% 51% 44% 41% 83% 60% 15%
Daniels 30 37 38 30 40 43 8 20 65
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 1 3 2 2 2 2 1 3 3
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 1 2 3 3 1 3 1 3 3
DK/NA 10 15 15 13 13 12 7 15 15
WHITE
NoColl Coll BrnAgn
Degree Degree Evngl Prot Cath
Obama 43% 51% 23% 28% 37%
Daniels 37 32 56 52 42
SMONE ELSE(VOL) 2 2 3 3 3
WLDN'T VOTE(VOL) 3 2 3 3 3
DK/NA 15 13 15 15 16
7. Is your opinion of - Barack Obama favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about him?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Elk His
Favorable 48% 6% 86% 43% 44% 51% 40% 91% 66%
Unfavorable 48 91 12 52 53 44 56 9 31
Hvn't hrd enough 2 1 2 2 1 2 2 - 3
REFUSED 2 1 1 3 2 3 3 -
AGE IN YRS INCOME POL PHIL
18-34 35-54 55+ <50 50-100 >100K Lib Mod Con
Favorable 61% 45% 42% 55% 47% 41% 83% 62% 17%
Unfavorable 35 51 54 42 49 56 14 32 81
Hvn't hrd enough 1 2 1 2 1 1 1 3 1
REFUSED 2 2 3 2 3 2 1 3 2
WHITE
NoColl Coll BrnAgn
Degree Degree Evngl Prot Cath
Favorable 45% 53% 23% 28% 39%
Unfavorable 50 43 75 68 58
Hvn't hrd enough 2 1 1 2 1
REFUSED 2 3 1 2 3
TREND: Is your opinion of - Barack Obama favorable, unfavorable, or haven't you heard enough about him?
Nov 18 Sep 09 Jul 21 Mar 25 Nov
FAVORABLE
High Low
19 Nov 12 Feb 21
2010 2010 2010 2010 2009 2008 2007
Favorable 48 47 49 47 50 67 44
Unfavorable 48 45 45 47 38 19 14
Hvn't hrd enough 2 5 4 4 9 11 40
REFUSED 2 3 2 1 2 3 1
8. Is your opinion of - Sarah Palin favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about her?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Favorable 36% 74% 8% 33% 40% 32% 41% 8% 31%
Unfavorable 51 17 78 54 49 53 47 74 56
Hvn't hrd enough 10 7 12 10 8 12 9 16 12
REFUSED 3 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 -
TREND: Is your opinion of - Sarah Palin favorable, unfavorable, or haven't you heard enough about her?
Nov 18 Sep 09 Jul 21 Mar 24 Sep 18
2010 2010 2010 2010 2008
Favorable 36 31 35 33 37
Unfavorable 51 50 49 51 30
Hvn't hrd enough 10 15 14 14 31
REFUSED 3 3 2 2 2
9. Is your opinion of - Mike Huckabee favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about him?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Elk His
Favorable 41% 69% 15% 45% 47% 35% 46% 17% 28%
Unfavorable 25 7 42 21 27 23 23 30 36
Hvn't hrd enough 33 23 41 33 26 40 30 52 35
REFUSED 2 1 2 2 1 2 1 1 1
TREND: Is your opinion of Mike Huckabee favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about him?
Nov 18 Oct 31
2010 2007
Favorable 41 15
Unfavorable 25 13
Hvn ' t hrd enough 33 70
REFUSED 2 2
10. Is your opinion of - Mitt Romney favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about him?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Elk His
Favorable 38% 64% 16% 43% 44% 32% 43% 14% 34%
Unfavorable 26 9 44 22 27 25 25 34 29
Him ' t hrd enough 35 26 40 33 27 41 31 51 37
REFUSED 2 1 1 2 2 1 1 1 1
TREND: Is your opinion of Mitt Romney favorable, unfavorable, or haven't you heard enough about him?
Nov 18 Mar 25 Nov 12 Oct 31 Aug 15 Jun 13 May 3
2010 2010 2008 2007 2007 2007 2007
Favorable 38 28 34 28 20 18 17
Unfavorable 26 25 20 25 22 20 16
Hvn ' t hrd enough 35 45 43 45 55 60 65
REFUSED 2 2 3 2 2 2 2
11. Is your opinion of - Newt Gingrich favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about him?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Favorable 30% 60% 9% 26% 36% 25% 34% 6% 24%
Unfavorable 43 18 62 45 44 43 43 53 34
Hvn ' t hrd enough 25 20 28 26 19 30 21 39 40
REFUSED 2 2 1 • 2 2 2 2 2 2
TREND: Is your opinion of Newt Gingrich favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about him?
Nov 18 Feb 21
2010 2007
Favorable 30 22
Unfavorable 43 47
Hvn ' t hrd - enough 25 30
REFUSED 2 2
12. Is your opinion of - Tim Pawlenty favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about him?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Favorable 13% 25% 4% 14% 18% 9% 14% 4% 11%
Unfavorable 10 3 18 9 11 10 9 14 16
Hvn ' t hrd enough 76 72 77 76 70 81 76 82 72
REFUSED 1 - 1 1 1 1 1 - 1
13. Is your opinion of - John Thune favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about him?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Favorable 7% 12% 2% 8% 10% 5% 7% 3% 12%
Unfavorable 5 2 9 3 5 5 4 8 9
Hvn't hrd enough 87 85 89 88 85 90 88 88 79
REFUSED 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
14. Is your opinion of - Mitch Daniels favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about him?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Favorable 10% 18% 5% 10% 12% 8% 11% 5% 7%
Unfavorable 8 2 14 7 9 8 7 21 9
Hvn't hrd enough 81 79 81 83 78 83 82 73 83
REFUSED 1 1 1 - - 1 1 1 1
15. Is your opinion of - Haley Barbour favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about him?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Favorable 12% 22% 4% 13% 16% 9% 13% 5% 19%
Unfavorable 12 4 19 13 14 10 11 19 13
Hvn't hrd enough 75 73 76 74 69 81 75 75 67
REFUSED 1 1 1 - 1 - 1 1 -
20. Looking ahead to the 2012 election for President, do you feel that Barack Obama deserves to be reelected,
or do you feel that he does not deserve to be reelected?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Deserves reelection 43% 4% 81% 35% 39% 46% 34% 86% 65%
Does not 49 92 13 51 53 45 57 4 29
DK/NA 9 4 6 14 8 9 9 9 5
AGE IN YRS INCOME POL PHIL
18-34 35-54 55+ <50 50-100 >100K Lib Mod Con
Deserves reelection 58% 38% 38% 49% 40% 37% 76% 54% 14%
Does not 34 53 54 42 51 56 15 34 80
DK/NA 8 9 8 9 9 7 9 11 5
WHITE
NoColl Coll BrnAgn
Degree Degree Evngl Prot Cath
Deserves reelection 41% 47% 19% 23% 32%
Does not 51 44 75 69 60
DK/NA 9 9 7 8 9
TREND: Looking ahead to the 2012 election for President, do you feel that Barack Obama deserves to be
reelected, or do you feel that he does not deserve to be reelected?
Nov 18 Jul 21 Mar 25
2010 2010 2010
Yes/deserves 43 40 40
No/does not 49 48 48
DK/NA 9 12 11
31. Is your opinion of the Republican Party favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about it?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Elk His
Favorable 40% 85% 9% 33% 42% 37% 46% 5% 29%
Unfavorable 45 8 75 48 45 45 40 73 57
Hvn't hrd enough 13 5 14 15 10 15 11 20 13
REFUSED 3 2 1 4 3 3 2 2 2
AGE IN YRS INCOME POL PHIL
18-34 35-54 55+ <50 50-100 >100K Lib Mod Con
Favorable 29% 45% 41% 33% 45% 49% 10% 30% 64%
Unfavorable 55 42 42 45 49 45 79 53 21
Hvn't hrd enough 15 10 13 19 3 4 9 14 12
REFUSED 1 2 4 2 3 2 2 3 2
I
I
WHITE
NoColl Coll BrnAgn
Degree Degree Evngl Prot Cath
Favorable 40% 39% 60% 57% 50%
Unfavorable 41 55 28 31 35
Hvn't hrd enough 16 4 10 10 12
REFUSED 3 3 2 2 2
TREND: Is your opinion of the Republican Party favorable, unfavorable, or haven't you heard enough about it?
(*Low also 25% Jul 2009)
Nov 18 Sep 09 Jul 21 Apr 21 Mar
FAVORABLE....
High Low
24 Nov 18 Oct 8
2010 2010 2010 2010 2010 2010 2009*
Favorable 40 35 33 33 33 40 25
Unfavorable 45 43 42 47 42 45 53
Hvn't hrd enough 13 19 21 15 21 13 18
REFUSED 3 3 4 4 4 3 4
32. Is your opinion of the Democratic Party favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about it?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Favorable 38% 5% 76% 28% 31% 44% 33% 69% 52%
Unfavorable 50 86 14 56 59 41 55 20 39
Hvn't hrd enough 10 7 8 11 7 12 10 10 8
REFUSED 3 2 1 4 3 3 3 1 1
AGE IN YRS INCOME POL PHIL
18-34 35-54 55+ <50 50-100 >100K Lib Mod Con
Favorable 48% 35% 35% 43% 41% 30% 71% 48% 13%
Unfavorable 40 53 53 41 52 64 21 37 76
Hvn't hrd enough 10 9 9 13 4 5 5 12 10
REFUSED 2 2 3 2 4 1 3 3 1
WHITE
NoColl Coll BrnAgn
Degree Degree Evngl Prot Cath
Favorable 37% 41% 20% 25% 31%
Unfavorable 49 53 69 65 54
Hvn't hrd enough 12 4 9 8 13
REFUSED 3 2 2 2 2
TREND: Is your opinion of the Democratic Party favorable, unfavorable, or haven't you heard enough about it?
Nov 18 Sep 09 Jul 21 Apr 21 Mar
FAVORABLE
High Low
24 Nov 12 Mar 24
2010 2010 2010 2010 2010 2008 2010
Favorable 38 34 34 32 33 55 33
Unfavorable 50 47 49 52 48 35 48
Hvn't hrd enough 10 15 14 12 17 6 17
REFUSED 3 3 3 3 2 4 2
33. Is your opinion of the the Tea Party Movement favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about
it?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Favorable 34% 65% 7% 35% 41% 28% 39% 10% 24%
Unfavorable 38 11 63 37 38 38 35 57 45
Hvn ' t hrd enough 26 22 28 26 20 32 25 32 30
REFUSED 1 1 1 2 1 2 1 1 1
TREND: Is your opinion of the Tea Party movement favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about
it?
Nov 17 Sep 09 Jul 21 Apr 21 Mar 24
2010 2010 2010 2010 2010
Favorable 34 30 33 32 28
Unfavorable 38 31 31 31 23
Him ' t hrd enough 26 37 35 34 49
REFUSED 1 2 1 2 1
38. Do you consider yourself part of the Tea party movement or not?
Tot Rep Dem Ind Men Worn Wht Blk His
Yes 13% 25% 2% 14% 14% 11% 14% 2% 12%
No 83 71 94 84 82 84 82 93 87
DK/NA 4 4 4 2 3 5 4 5 1
AGE IN YRS INCOME POL PHIL
18-34 35-54 55+ <50 50-100 >100K Lib Mod Con
Yes 8% 15% 14% 13% 12% 13% 2% 4% 26%
No 88 83 81 82 86 85 95 91 71
DK/NA 4 . 2 5 5 1 2 3 5 3
WHITE
NoColl Coll BrnAgn
Degree Degree Evngl Prot Cath
Yes 14% 11% 23% 17% 15%
No 81 88 71 78 81
DK/NA 5 2 6 5 4
TREND: Do you consider yourself part of the Tea Party movement or not?
Nov 18 Sep 09 Jul 21 Apr 21 Mar 24
2010 2010 2010 2010 2010
Yes 13 12 - 12 15 13
No 83 80 81 79 80
DK/NA 4 9 7 6 6
Quinnipiac University • 275 Mount Carmel Ave. • Hamden, CT 06518-1908 • 203-582-8200
begin_of_the_skype_highlighting 203-582-8200 end_of_the_skype_highlighting • Admissions and Financial
Aid: 800-462-1944 begin_of_the_skype_highlighting 800-462-1944 end_of_the_skype_highlighting
Contact us with your questions and comments. Copyright 1999-2010Script for writing out current year for copyright
Quinnipiac University. Statement of liability and copyrights.
Script for Google Analytics"
6123,"Thanks so much for doing this. I will follow up w a call to FM Patifio who I now understand was also injured after I spoke
to him yesterday."
6124,"Some more classified papers coming to house at 6pm:
- one re karzai
Update about an AmCit in Somalia
David Hale readout of a meeting
Barak/Abbas on Sunday"
6125,"Here's the list of deep dives we were thinking of doing in the next few months:
Sept: Indonesia (pre-Comprehensive Ptshp Dialogue), Russia (pre-NRC)
October: India (pre-POTUS trip), Balkans (pre-your potential trip to the Balkans)
November: Central Asia (pre-your trip)
And then other deep dives for the future (or whenever it might be timely):
Iran (pre-P5+1?)
Egypt
Turkey/Cyprus
Mexico
Brazil"
6127,"Lois Quam
Thursday, August 26, 2010 4:45 PM
Great to talk with you today and will follow up right after Labor Day.
Yours, Lois"
6128,OF SENIOR TALIBAN COMMANDER TO KABUL FOR TALKS
6130,"The Economist has invited you to submit an 800 word piece for their 2011 outlook issue. You'd be the only USG official,
and would be featured with David Cameron and other heads of state. We all agree we should definitely do. It's a bit of a
short fuse, so if you agree Josh Daniel would work on boiling down your CFR speech."
6132,I imagine early next week
6133,Fyi - cryptic to me.
6134,Also fyi. Not sure what to make of Kim's inquiry.
6137,"Wexler coming up at 630 pm, menendez at 7pm. Ops will connect them to you.
###"
6140,"The team believes that some high level strategic targeted Hill calls are needed to explain our position on the settlement
moratorium extension. The thought was:
S calls to Kerry, Berman, Lowey, Feinstein;
Mitchell calls to Levin, Lugar, Leahy.
We would get points to you tomorrow, for calls over the weekend if possible, or Monday.
Does this work?"
6141,"He's headed to cisco phone
They will connect u at 1:45"
6142,Any issues bif I pull the trigger?
6143,to stay away from public places
6146,http://www.brookings.edu/—/media/Files/rc/reports/2010/08_arab_opinion_poll_telhami/08_arab_opinion_pollielhami.pdf
6148,Have it now.
6149,"Samuel Berger
Thursday, August 26, 2010 10:08 PM
RE: Can we schedule call over the weekend?
I am around Fri-Sun. •Leave on Monday.
Best numbers: w)202-637-5698"
6150,"Received. Just out of a SVTC on the Europe issue.
On Sat, Oct 2, 2010 at 2:31 PM, H <HDR22@c1intonemai1.com> wrote:"
6151,"We can follow up on both.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State"
6152,Matthew doyle gave heads up that blair wants to talk about meeting with you separately before the sept 1 dinner.
6153,"Coming up at 800am. Ops will connect it to you.
###"
6155,"Importance: High
Ms- mashabane just cancelled the 8am call this morning. We're waiting for them to call back and propose a new time.
###"
6157,Here is what we propose you use to present in the cabinet call tonight:
6158,Fyi
6159,"Tomorrow will give you a cleaner version, but you could get the current draft this morning if today is better for you
work-wise."
6160,"Lissa is out for most of day. There is a complete draft w/ the changes u asked for that Jake has. Lissa will write through
this draft for a good line edit tonight, so it will be smoother tmw. Just let us know what u wd prefer. AM"
6161,Sigh - will send you traffic that lead to this response
6162,"Netanyahu call points
Background
Quote from a readout of Netanyahu's meeting with senior advisers on Friday:
""Everyone knows that restrained and moderate construction in Judea and Samaria in the next year will no even affect
the peace process. Therefore the international community needs to call on the Palestinians to continue engaging in
peace talks. It is in the interest of the Palestinians just as it is in ours""... ""We did it [the moratorium] in order to give the
opportunity to enter direct negotiations without preconditions. Now I expect that the Palestinians show their flexibility
and continue with peace talks.""...""Unfortunately, as opposed to us, the Palestinians are just hardening their stance.""
Quote from Yasser Abed Rabbo that Bibi may raise:
""The leadership confirms that the resumption of talks requires tangible steps, the first of them a freeze on
settlements. The Palestinian leadership holds Israel responsible for obstructing the negotiations."""
6163,"I gave AMS a revised draft yesterday morning and I just got it back with her retooled diplomatic section. She has asked
for some more fact-checking to be done today. Hopefully she didn't re-write too much. I will know more when I work on
it more closely this afternoon."
6164,Per my prior email — read traffic down
6166,"Info on eric john that u asked for:
Ops is in contact with Eric, and has passed to him a message that the Secretary has
been informed and would be available to speak with him at an appropriate moment."
6167,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Friday, August 27, 2010 10:25 AM
Re: Eric john"
6169,"I did not mean to make it seem as if Lissa is holding this up in any way — she and I have tag teamed
pretty much around the clock all week and she has been making time amid an enormous array of
important family obligations that she had set up on the assumption that she would have handed off
to Josh Daniel by now. As you know, she is indispensable. AM
Anne-Mane Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
6171,"Talks.doc
I have not been able to get a psychology dinner set up, but I have found the article that you read on
the difference an apology can make in the Middle East (coming in next email) and commissioned a
useful paper from Louise Diamond, an expert on psychology and negotiations who has done a lot
of work between the Israels and the Palestinians herself (attached). It's about 5 pages; I really think
it is worth a read. Finally, on changing the frame to look forward, I strongly recommend that you
spend 8 minutes to look at a video produced by a Rand study called The Arc, which proposes a
high-speed road/rail project connecting the key cities in the West Bank and Gaza. It is a powerful,
powerful vision of what could be, one that will play right into Bibi's emphasis on economic growth.
For my money, it would be worth a private 8 minutes screening. I will send the link in the next
email.
AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
6172,"For your Sunday reading, a summary of an interesting proposal by former Jordanian foreign minister Marwan Muasher.
""Palestinian-Israeli Direct Talks: The Case for a Regional Approach""By Marwan Muasher (Carnegie Endowment Bulletin,
August 2010)
Marwan Muasher – former Jordanian foreign minister, ambassador, and deputy prime minister – advocates a regional
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, capitalizing on the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative. His approach depends first
on securing end-game ""deposits"" from all parties: The parties would offer hypothetical commitments that they might
not be willing to give at the onset, but that can be ""deposited"" with the U.S. and committed to only if the other side is
willing to do the same. Saudi Arabia's deposit, for instance, would outline and agree to a package that included details
about Jerusalem. The Saudi package would also promise to secure Arab and Muslim backing for the painful compromises
the Palestinians would need to accept.
Muasher advocates a similar approach to the Syrian track—asking Syria to deposit end-game commitments in return for
full Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights. In their deposits, the Saudis and the Syrians must clearly commit to
address the inclusion of Hamas and Hezbollah in any regional agreement. The Arab states would not only have to end all
logistical, financial, and military support for these two groups, but they would have to assume responsibility for
delivering these two actors, helping to transform them into political players. Israel's deposit would spell out its
commitment to a solution based on 1967 borders and a return of the Golan.
According to Muasher, these deposits would make it much easier for President Abbas to engage in talks aimed at ending
the conflict. After he has been given Arab cover, Abbas could provide his own end-game deposits. According to
Muasher, absent these commitments from the Arab states, the Palestinian positions will remain maximalist. Once the
U.S. has deposits from all sides that make for a reasonable, comprehensive package, it should put this package on the
table in cooperation with the Quartet. Once the comprehensive package is presented, the U.S. can focus on confidence-
building measures to move all sides toward the end game.
AM"
6173,"I'm sending 2 emails today b/c I didn't send one yesterday. :-)
Attached is a one-pager fleshing out how we could launch a Pledge for Palestine based on the Warren Buffett model. If
we were to do this, we could start with which includes, in addition to
One way to go would be to ask everyone to make
conditional commitments contingent on raising a big enough sum to give the fund real impact. We also have great
contacts with a group of young Arab business leaders -- I spoke to them last year and cd quickly reach out to their chair.
We are getting details from Rand about the full cost of The ARC project.
AM"
6176,I'll be here at the office for awhile -- happy to talk secure at any time. Just let me know what works for you.
6177,Thanks AMS
6179,"yes. i will be on a call at 130. can i call you at 230?
On Sun, Oct 3, 2010 at 1:05 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
I can do after 2--does that work?"
6182,"trying to reach your yellow phone now
On Sun, Oct 3, 2010 at 1:09 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Yes."
6184,"Here is the link to the video of The Arc. http://friendsofthearc.ore, a national infrastructure trunkline for a future
Palestinian State developed by the RAND Corporation. It is only 8 minutes long, but a great overview of the Arc vision
and its potential for enabling peace in the region. I promise you it is worth it. It has tested very well with both
Palestinians, Israelis and American Jews and Palestinians. It is a genuinely a transformational idea that did not originate
from American politicians or diplomats, but rather from innovative American minds in collaboration with stakeholders
from all walks of life in Palestine, Israel, the US, Europe, and the Muslim world. And it could be largely financed with
private finance.
AM"
6189,"Thanks Madame Secretary --
Kagan also had an unusually supportive piece on Friday that prominently mentioned your role on Asia
He built Singapore from nothing and his book is pretty damn inspirational on that front.
I leave for Asia early Monday and will check in from the road. Thanks and best Kurt"
6190,"Ops alert re flotilla:
Mariam Gaza flotilla update #2 for 8/21: No departure on August 21 or 22
No Activity in Tripoli Port
(SBU) On Saturday, August 21, at 1620 hours Embassy investigators reported that both the
Mariam (formerly the Jounieh Star) and the Julia (aka the Naji al-Ali) remain in their same positions in the Lebanese port
of Tripoli without any signs of activity. The investigators added that there was no elevated security presence at the port
and no press was present. The team will return to Tripoli on Sunday, August 22, and we will provide further reports, as
appropriate.
GOL Says Ship Will Not Sail Before Monday
(SBU)
on either August 21 or 22, although
assured the RSO that the Mariam will not depart B6
declined to provide additional information.
Flotilla Organizer Claims Ship Will Not Sail Directly to Gaza
(U) Coordinator of the Mariam's efforts, Samar al-Hajj, told the LBC television channel on Saturday that contacts are
ongoing with countries near Gaza in order to acquire permission for the ship to dock at one of their ports. She
complained, ""It seems as if there is universal war against us....We will not allow anyone to cancel the ship's trip."" She
added that the ship will not head to Gaza directly from Tripoli, stressing, ""The ship cannot be the reason for the start of a
war."""
6191,"Enjoy the beach, and all best.
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
on: 08/21/2020"
6193,"October 15, 2010
For: Hillary"
6195,"I had a good discussion with Jake and AMS last night and we all agree that the most recent draft helped us crystallize
what the main point actually is (and isn't). So I am re-working the intro to focus more directly on the intersection of
diplomacy and development as the basis for the QDDR. I think it's working well. AMS is emphatic about re- doing the
diplomacy section along these lines, so I hope to get her stuff this afternoon (I will probably need to polish it up). And I
am re-tooling the other buckets to fit into this better and tighter frame. Jake suggests we get it to you tomorrow if that's
okay. And thanks for the good wishes to Max!
On Aug 21, 2010, at 11:32 AM, H wrote:
> Whenever you think it's ready, send it to Huma for printing for me.
> Thx so much and good luck to Max!
>"
6196,"November 23, 2010
Effort for Liberal Balance to G.O.P. Groups
Begins
By MICHAEL LUO
In what may prove a significant development for the 2012 elections, David Brock, a prominent Democratic political
operative, says he has amassed $4 million in pledges over the last few weeks and is moving quickly to hire a staff to set
up what he hopes will become a permanent liberal counterweight over the airwaves to the Republican-leaning outside
groups that spent so heavily on this year's midterm elections.
Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, a former Maryland lieutenant governor and the eldest of Robert F. Kennedy's 11 children,
has agreed to serve as the chairwoman of the group, which will be called American Bridge, lending to the still extremely
nascent undertaking the weight of what remains one of the most significant families in Democratic politics.
Leading Democratic donors who have already pledged money to the group include Rob McKay, heir to the Taco Bell
fortune and chairman of the Democracy Alliance, a partnership of wealthy liberal donors; Robert Dyson, who heads
Dyson-Kissner-Moran, a takeover and acquisitions firm in New York City; and Marcia L. Carsey, a television producer who
gave $1 million to Democratic outside groups in 2004.
Mr. Brock said in an interview that he planned to formally file papers with the Federal Election Commission on Tuesday to
set up American Bridge as what is known as an independent-expenditure-only political action committee, meaning it will
be able to take in contributions of unlimited size from individuals and corporations but must regularly disclose its donors.
Certain to set off debate, however, is that Mr. Brock appears to be positioning his new organization so that fund-raising
consultants can raise money for Democratic-oriented media efforts not just through American Bridge but also via one of
the nonprofit organizations Mr. Brock currently runs, Media Matters Action Network, which does not disclose its donors.
The action network, which tracks conservative politicians and advocacy organizations, is organized as a 501(c)(4)
nonprofit group and is set to take on an expanded role in the 2012 elections, including potentially running television ads,
according to an internal draft concept paper about American Bridge's and Media Matter Action Network's plans obtained
by The New York Times.
Mr. Brock said that ""money is money,"" and that he would actively solicit donors for both entities and, in the end, the media
spending would be apportioned accordingly.
The moves by Mr. Brock in recent weeks make his the most concrete effort so far on the part of Democratic activists to
establish some kind of centralized structure that they hope will become the left's answer in 2012 to such groups on the
right as the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, American Crossroads and others, which significantly outspent Democratic-
leaning outside groups this year. It is too early to say whether Mr. Brock's group will emerge as the go-to vehicle for giant
contributions on the left.
Mr. Brock led a much-heralded independent group in the 2008 presidential election that failed to gain much traction after
the Obama campaign indicated that it preferred that donors not give to such groups.
But Mr. Brock, a former conservative journalist who publicly disavowed the right in the late 1990s, is a respected political
player, who has drawn plaudits from liberal donors for his running of the array of groups under the Media Matters
umbrella.
Mr. Brock pointed out that the various groups associated with Media Matters had raised a combined $23 million this year.
Its backers include major Democratic donors like George Soros, the billionaire who recently announced he had given $1
million to the group; Peter B. Lewis, the billionaire chairman of Progressive Insurance, who, like Mr. Soros, gave more
than $20 million to Democratic-oriented groups in 2004; and the Hollywood producer Steve Bing.
""My donor base already constitutes the major individual players who have historically given hundreds of millions of dollars
to these types of efforts,"" Mr. Brock said. ""They just need to be asked, and I have no doubt they will step up at this critical
time.""
There also seems to be widespread agreement among Democratic activists and donors on the need for such groups to be
more heavily involved in the 2012 elections.
White House officials have signaled in recent weeks that the Obama administration would not object to Democratic-
leaning outside groups getting involved in the 2012 elections, a change from the Obama campaign's attitude toward such
groups in 2008. But they have also indicated that they would prefer that the names of donors be disclosed.
The lack of disclosure among Republican-leaning outside groups became a central Democratic talking point this year as
spending by outside groups on the right exploded before the midterm elections.
But the overriding desire on the part of liberal donors and activists to hold on to the White House and to win back some of
what was lost in the House and Senate may trump those principles. Most political operatives agree that it is easier to raise
money if the option of offering anonymity is available.
""It would be sort of a funny principle to stand on, to essentially tie one hand behind your back,"" Mr. McKay said.
Besides Mr. Brock, numerous Democratic activists have been in discussions about setting up similar independent efforts.
On Monday, for instance, Steve Rosenthal, who was the chief executive of America Coming Together, a Democratic fund-
raising vehicle that focused on voter mobilization in the 2004 election, convened a group of political operatives, many of
whom were active in that election, at a Washington restaurant to discuss what might be done for 2012.
No one, however, has apparently gone as far as Mr. Brock in terms of raising money and formally setting up an
organization.
Mr. Brock said the $4 million in pledges the group has collected so far should be deposited in its bank account by the end
of the first quarter of 2011.
By way of comparison, America's Families First Action Fund, one of the major Democratic independent efforts in House
races this year, raised just over $4 million for the entire cycle up until mid-October.
The internal concept paper for American Bridge lays out a series of priorities for the next year, including initially focusing
on attacking vulnerable Republicans in the Senate and the House, as a prelude to major spending in 2012."
6197,yes
6199,Eric DID regret the invite mentioned on your call grid yesterday (11/22). I will update your grid to reflect that.
6200,"Jack Rosen and Gov. John Lynch called back. I'll update the grid to reflect that.
Lauren"
6201,"Will do
-----"
6202,"Also Politico, WSJ, Wash Post, NPR, and Hardball, more to come
Sent via DROID on Verizon Wireless
Original message"
6203,"Not yet - EAP inquiring.
-----"
6204,Fyi
6205,"Great. Thanks. Will give you a heads up when am sending to Huma.
On Aug 21, 2010, at 12:17 PM, H wrote:
> That's ok."
6206,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Tuesday, November 23, 2010 10:29 PM
Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
an SP memo on possible legal and nonlegal strategies re wikileaks
SP WikiLeaks doc final11.23.10.docx
Following this morning's meetings I activated my four legal eagles on the SP staff — Peter Harrell,
Jen Harris, Bill Burke White, and Catherine Powell (that includes two law profs and two Yale law
grads who certainly could be law profs). They in turn reached out to people at the Berkmann
Center at Harvard and other experts, working together with Alec Ross. Alec has been particularly
useful in terms not only of his knowledge but also his sensitivity to how anything we might try to
do could impact our own internet freedom agenda. The result is the attached memo, which has one
interesting legal approach and I think some very good suggestions about how to handle our public
diplomacy. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
6209,"sbwhoeor
Sunday, September 19, 2010 11:18 PM
H: Richard Medley has sent this around in his private newsletter. Sid
US Election And The Fed
Welcome To The New (Old) World
September 19, 2010
One of the main debates inside senior Fed offices is how much they may have to balance a much more
conservative fiscal policy if the Republicans take over. This is the most important question facing officials
on both sides of the fence (far more than squiggles and whirls of monthly numbers).
But it's not just spending and taxes, important as they are, it's also implementation of Reg Reform and
Health Care Reform. All of that is going to change after November. Here are the details.
Amid the snarkiness about how crazy the Tea Party candidates may be (and, as you know, we LOVE
snarkiness) two things should not be lost:
1. The President has lost control of the spending and tax agenda
2. The President has lost control of implementing the Reg Reform and health care
legislation Congress pushed through.
All polling from both parties and independent sources point strongly to the Republicans taking over the
House. Although they are less likely to take over the Senate, they will be able to gain effective control of
spending, taxes and large scale administrative reforms.
Let's start with spending:
The basic fact is that all spending has to be approved by Congress and it starts with the House. As we
wrote nearly a week ago, House Republican Leader Boehner and his senior staff have made it clear to us
that they would like to freeze spending at 2008 levels with an annual cost savings of $340 billion. This will
be one of the top Republican priorities.
Freezing spending at 2008 levels will not happen. However, even in the unlikely event the Republicans do
not take over the House the budget will -- at most -- be frozen at or near FY 2010 levels (i.e. the last time
money was formally appropriated).
Since there have been no spending bills approved and the fiscal year starts in October, the Congress has
to pass a ""continuing resolution"" that keeps the government running until specific appropriations are made
(the 1995 government shutdown happened because there were no appropriations and no continuing
resolution...the government literally runs out of spending authority).
Congress will pass a CR in the next few weeks and it will most likely run through the formation of the new
Congress (say February or March) next year. They could only do it through the lame duck session, but
that would be cutting it close and too cute.
Because the new Congress - even if the Republicans fail to take full control of the House - will be
dominated by fiscal conservatives, Boehner's CR idea will have traction. The Senate will make it more
moderate, but then it will be up to the President to veto it and thus shut down government or sign it and
take the hit.
In turn that does two things: (1) it frees up money for the Bush tax rollovers and (2) it helps the plan to
slow or freeze implementation of the reg reform and health care reform bills.
The first part is obvious. The second may be less so. People forget that implementation of these rules
requires staff increases, staff reg writing, etc and that's money. By freezing spending at previous levels
you freeze the ability to hire new staff and you seriously obstruct the new rule writing process.
Add to that Boehner's commitment to overturn the two major regulatory reforms and you've got a tidal
wave of indecision and paralysis (Jesus, talk about mixed metaphors although it would be interesting to
see one of those).
The hearings he will announce and simply the chilling effect of him threatening to overturn the laws will
accomplish ninety-percent of what he wants to get done, and potentially give the courts time to strike
down parts of the health care bill now under appeal.
THE SENATE
While everyone has written off Republican control of the Senate (we haven't), the attention should be on
what the Senate will look like even if the consensus of 52-54 Democratic majority prevails.
The point is how the US Senate will function in January 2011 given its new membership. We got a
glimpse of what this would look like when moderate Republican Scott Brown was elected and the health
care public option was panned and Reg Reform was trimmed around the edges.
The incoming crop of members are much more ardent on government spending, the debt, taxes and
regulatory oversight. They will make Boehner's job much easier
Take a quick look at the new members (and the several they will marry up with once they are sworn into
office).
While some of these candidates are replacing Republican open seats, all of them are generally considered
more conservative than their predecessors:
1. ck (CO) - likely winner
2. Toomey (PA) - likely winner
3. Rubio (FL) - likely winner
4. Ayotte (NH) - likely winner
5. Blunt (MO) - likely winner
6. Portman (OH) -likely winner
7. Coats (IN) - likely winner
8. Paul (KY) - likely winner
9. Miller (AK) - likely winner
10. Lee (UT) - likely winner
11. Boozman (AR) - likely winner
12. Hoeven (ND) - likely winner
13. Kirk (IL) - 50/50 (lean GOP)
14. Angle (NV) - 50/50 tossup
There are several other Democrat-controlled seats that remain in play (CA, WI, WA, and CT). These races
continue to develop and we will report more as the picture on Election Day becomes clearer.
These likely new members will join the following traditional budget trouble-makers in the US Senate:
1. DeMint (SC)
2. Coburn (OK)
3. Inhofe (OK)
4. McConnell (KY)
5. Kyl (AZ)
6. McCain (AZ)
7. Thune (SD)
8. Crapo (ID)
9. Vitter (LA)
10. Burr (NC)
One aggressive Senator can slow the body to a snail's pace, and Republicans operated efficiently as a
minority party with only 41 votes total. In January, there will be at least 22 new and existing serious road
blocks now patrolling the Senate Floor. The Republican pick-ups will make getting to 60 votes for cloture
impossible on spending bills.
Welcome to the new reality."
6210,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, September 20, 2010 7:33 AM
Saudis
This is the readout we got from Denise Moraga, who is traveling with Brennan:"
6211,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Tuesday, November 23, 2010 11:52 PM
Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
Chet Crocker, Scott Lasensky, and Sam Lewis OPED on MEP
Crocker Lasensky Lewis OPED.doc
I'm abusing my privileges and sending you two emails in one evening,
published yet.
November 2010
Declaring America's Stand on Middle East Peace
By Chester A. Crocker, Scott B. Lasensky and Samuel W. Lewis
Faltering Middle East peace talks need a jolt. Washington has a powerful option for moving the process forward: taking
a firm stand on how to end the conflict.
An American declaration of principles—carefully crafted and properly marketed--could spark a debate and thereby
change the political calculus for leaders. As a mediator and a world power, one of America's strongest assets is the
ability to legitimize ideas and then rally others in support. A central role for the U.S. in this conflict must be to define the
zone of negotiability.
This does not mean imposing peace. Rather, it would be a statement of the basic principles the U.S. believes can guide
the parties toward a negotiated solution. America has long declared its support for ""two states,"" but must now say more
about what that means in practice.
Even if the current talks resume, without American ideas the parties are unlikely to agree on the broad trade-offs
necessary to reach a peace deal. A quick deal on ""borders and security,"" as many have proposed, is itself unlikely
without Washington addressing the end-game. Otherwise, both sides would be too exposed on issues set for later
discussion, like Jerusalem and refugees. Opinion polling has consistently showed that support for peace is strongest
when all the core issues are addressed.
An American statement of principles would mobilize regional support. It would provide, for the first time, a public
framework for engaging sponsors of the Arab Peace Initiative. It would also strengthen our ability to reassert the
importance of a regional support structure for the bilateral negotiations, especially by reviving multilateral contacts and
meetings involving Israelis and their neighbors from throughout the region. Moreover, greater regional engagement on
the peace process can carry powerful benefits for regional challenges like the Iranian nuclear program.
A clearer U.S. declaration is also the surest way to protect prospects for a two-state solution from an unrelenting
onslaught on the ground that pushes the parties away from a peace deal. An American set of ideas would anchor
present-day demands on issues like Jerusalem, security and settlements in a clear vision of the future.
Perhaps most urgently, it would broaden the debate from the narrow confines of the settlements question.
At a minimum, the American declaration should be based on the 1967 lines, with agreed territorial swaps; support a
compromise on Jerusalem that allows for two capitals for two states; include provisions about security limitations and
guarantees; reiterate America's support for an agreed solution to the refugee problem; and reaffirm our long-standing
commitment to the State of Israel. But American principles should also include some caveat, given that our ultimate
interest is in an agreed, viable solution—not in any particular formula.
What would it take for American ideas to succeed? Unlike some past efforts, Washington should not try to 'pre-cook'
this declaration with one or more parties or to choreograph their reactions. In fact, the U.S. statement of principles
would be explicitly described as what our own country believes in and can support; and by implication cannot support.
Thus, the U.S. statement would not be designed to achieve immediate approval or adoption by the parties. Its purpose
would be to clarify where America stands, how we define our interests and what we can work for. It would aim at
influencing the climate of thinking in the region, sobering up those with illusions and encouraging those who need our
support.
Timing and context are of course key considerations. Assuming the current gridlock in negotiations persists, some time
must elapse until our election results have been digested, here and abroad, and before public attention can be
redirected toward the foreboding and increasingly dangerous Arab-Israel stalemate.
A presidential speech will then be essential to dramatize the seriousness of our purpose and to lay out the principles. It
should be immediately followed by a major, high level diplomatic effort to persuade key Middle East leaders and our
Quartet and UN allies of our genuine desire to regionalize the peacemaking effort. To maximize support from key
members of Congress, the speech should occur before Congress adjourns. No further consultation with the stalemated
parties beyond the routine should precede the speech, and leaks of its contents must be kept to an absolute minimum if
our purpose is not to be undermined.
The speech could usefully also remove some of the veil of silence that shrouds breakthroughs in past negotiations; for
example, progress in the Annapolis process.
As for the substance, in its endorsement of a two-state solution and comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace, the Obama
Administration has hinted that a Palestinian settlement should also accompany normalized relations between Israel and
the Arab states, putting a broader framing around what has traditionally been defined as a conflict between Israel and
its immediate neighbors. The normalization piece of the puzzle should be more fully articulated as part of a new strategy
based on presenting American ideas to the parties. It is a way to entice skeptical Israelis, but it also leads back to a long
overdue need for Washington to engage on the Arab Peace Initiative.
If the U.S. puts forward its own peace principles, American leadership can ensure that any diplomatic process is defined
by as clear a picture as possible of what the parties can expect to gain through a negotiated settlement, and of what
they will never gain without one.
Skeptics say it is too risky to present American ideas to the parties, that it would pull the rug out from under current
leaders, exposing them to withering domestic criticism. Others argue that it will galvanize obstructionists, not those who
support compromise, and could very well precipitate a crisis on the ground. Others simply worry about the cost to
American prestige should any of the key players react negatively. But the risks are overstated, and a complete collapse
of the process would be far more dangerous, particularly as the strategic environment shifts in favor of regional forces
that seek to undermine, rather than promote peace.
America can and must do more than limit itself to managing a conflict that has all too often upended our shared
interests in peace and stability.
END
Chester A. Crocker is Professor of Strategic Studies at the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service; Scott
Lasensky is Senior Research Associate at the U.S. Institute of Peace; Samuel W. Lewis is a retired diplomat and former
U.S. Ambassador to Israel. These views are their own."
6213,Latest draft of letter is on your chair.
6214,"Miserable evening with the Arabs, with all of them reinforcing each other on moratorium walk-out. Euros just as bad.
Fayyad was the only bright light."
6215,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, November 24, 2010 5:36 AM
Slaughter, Anne-Marie; H
Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J
Re: an SP memo on possible legal and nonlegal strategies re wikileaks
Thx"
6216,"Apparently Jeff said evening was horrible. Only AbZ and Kuwaiti showed up from GCC. All formal speeches, little ability
for chit chat. No great mood overall."
6217,"Basic principles for NYT ed board:
US principles: gov't should reflect election results; gov't must have significant role for Iraqiyya (good for internal stability
and regional integration); gov't formation should include a strong reform and power-sharing understanding; we want a
gov't as committed to the long-term partnership with us as we are. These are principles backed by all Iraqi leaders, who
need to make decisions now to break the deadlock.
We have no candidate for PM. We have encouraged Allawi's Iraqiyya and Maliki's State of Law to see if they can work
together, because that reflects the votes and would give the new gov't a healthy majority. But who fills what position --
that's for the Iraqis to decide.
There may be other ways to have a gov't. But this should happen soon. Where we would have concerns: if the Sadrists
end up with the power to veto gov't decisions or to topple the gov't."
6218,FYI
6219,"Senkaku is the Japanese name
Diayou is the Chinese name (the Diayoutai guesthouse is named after the islands) I've seen reference to both in articles.
We say Senkaku."
6220,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, September 20, 2010 9:24 AM
Re: Island names"
6222,Assume jake and pir talked to u about
6223,"Will do.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State"
6224,"I am hoping you are talking about a Pledge for Palestine, but as I noted a while ago, I had also been thinking about how
he and Gates could globalize their overall Pledge campaign in a way that could help change the attitude/culture of elites
in countries like Pakistan toward greater social responsibility (starting with paying taxes). We haven't gotten that idea
fleshed out yet, but it would be worth at least raising for later follow-up.
AM"
6225,"Sullivan, Jacob .1 <Sullivann@state.gov>
Wednesday, November 24, 2010 3:34 PM
H; jake.sullivar
RE: Anwar Ibrahim
According to our team, this is likely misinformation spread by political opponents of his.
-----"
6226,I'll get you a list - but those were first year totals so by now it might have evened out.
6227,"Here is the latest from Lissa, Jake, and me (I took over from Lissa this morning because her son is winning all his soccer
matches somewhere.in Pennsylvania). We still have a bunch of things to add (as you will see in yellow), but this is
definitely ready for you to engage. I think it will make a real impact, and it fits Jim Hoge's desire not just to make this a
report card on the QDDR but to advance some bigger animating ideas.
Some questions:
I hope this is a read that improves your vacation mood rather than detracting from it!
AM"
6230,"The lash is why you beat them in miles!
• Let me get you actual #s
But both Madeleine and especially Condi were on the road an awful lot"
6231,"Here is the latest from Lissa, Jake, and me (I took over from Lissa this morning because her son is winning all his soccer
matches somewhere in Pennsylvania). We still have a bunch of things to add (as you will see in yellow), but this is
definitely ready for you to engage. I think it will make a real impact, and it fits Jim Hoge's desire not just to make this a
report card on the QDDR but to advance some bigger animating ideas.
Some questions:
I hope this is a read that improves your vacation mood rather than detracting from it!
AM"
6235,"Please Pass to the Secretary
Madame Secretary,
A shoot out occurred on August 20 in front of the American School in Monterrey (AFSM), resulting in the death of two
bodyguards. An investigation is continuing into the details, but our understanding at this point is that it was an
attempted kidnapping targeting the relatives of a local business executive. While it does not appear that U.S. families
were targeted, the sharp increase in kidnapping incidents in the Monterrey area, and this event in particular, present a
very high risk to the families of U.S. citizens who might be become incidental victims.
U.S. security and law enforcement personnel have engaged local and federal security officials to seek their help on
understanding the immediate risks and measures that can be taken. I have urged U.S. families at the Consulate in
Monterrey not to send their children to school in the coming days while we review the events that took place on August
20. We also are advising U.S. citizens in the area that we have urged Consulate personnel not to send their children to
school while we complete this security review.
I am sure that the warden notice will lead to a rash of press reports on U.S. concerns about security in Monterrey. More
broadly, if the government cannot get the kidnappings in Monterrey under control, that may affect our ability to
function in Monterrey. I have advised Secretary Espinosa of this, and have sought her help as well to address consulate
security.
Consulate personnel are currently on ""authorized departure"" and have the option to send their families to a U.S.
location. Pat Kennedy is in close touch on these matters.
Carlos Pascual"
6238,"See below.
No update yet - John is out and have not connected with Jack but will early am.
cdm"
6240,"Not a day goes by that I am not thankful for the chance you've given to me to work on issues that mean so much to me. I
am so proud to work for you.
But never was this more so than this week, when amid everything else, you stood up courageously for principle on 686.
Our voice did not prevail, but it was heard, and everyone in my office who worked on this was so very proud that we
have a great leader of conscience as our Secretary.
Happy Thanksgiving to your whole family.
With thanks and respect,
Harold
Harold Hongju Koh
The Legal Adviser
U.S. Department of State
Suite 6421
2201 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20520-6421
202 647 9598 office
mobile
202 647 7096 fax"
6242,"Checked in with people and everyone seems to be doing their own thing,"
6243,FYI - see below.
6244,"Back in today to start working on the details for sept 1 - pls let me know of any specifics you want to make sure are
executed.
Enjoy your rest."
6245,"Hope you are having a (relatively) quiet day with the family.
I'm taking a break from peeling potatoes to report the following:
I've circulated a call sheet for your conversation with Bibi to the group and asked them to look at it tomorrow morning
(no need to make them do it today) so that we can have a consensus recommendation for how you should approach the
call. The idea would be to send you the call sheet around noon tomorrow in time for an afternoon call, if you have the
time."
6248,"We are expecting comments back from the larger group this afternoon and will begin to incorporate them this evening.
The draft needs polishing, as you can see. Will you be sending your own comments or waiting for the next draft? Thx."
6250,"Lissa Muscatine <
Monday, August 23, 2010 9:25 AM
Re: Foreign Affairs
Any time between about 1 and 4 would be best if that works for you.
The draft as it stands now is a conglomeration of points from AMS, Jake, and me, but I wasn't able to write through the
whole thing before you got it.
On Aug 23, 2010, at 9:22 AM, H wrote:
> I would like to call you later today. What times work for you after
> noon?
>"
6251,Ok
6252,"Good morning,
1. Cheryl is trying to reach you to follow-up on your weekend conversation.
2. She's been w/o a computer all morning because hers malfunctioned and POEMS is still working to fix it.
3. President Carter called and spoke with Cheryl this am. He asks to speak with you directly about his trips. Home
#:
Joanne Laszczych
Assistant to Counselor and Chief of Staff, Cheryl Mills
Department of State
2201 C Street, N.W.
Phone: 202-647-5548
Fax: 202-736-4535"
6253,"Apologies - she is with Daniel Yohannes and asked to call you back in 10 minutes
Joanne"
6254,"Cheryl says you can return the call. Not necessary to speak w/her beforehand
Joanne"
6255,"Gave info to Ops and they are placing the calls
Joanne"
6256,been released
6257,"sbwhoeop
Monday, August 23, 2010 10:06 AM
H: Yes, there is a vast right wing conspiracy. Sid
B6
A must read piece that looks at the Koch brothers control and funding of the tea party and right wing.
http://www.nowyorkenconlirep2rtin08130/100830fa fpct maysl2pitatIbie=true#IxzzoxQ
uvTcbT
A REPORTER AT 1.ARGE
COVERT OPERATIONS
The billionaire brothers who are waging a war against Obama.
by Jane Mayetmo,
(.s..
David H. Koch in 1996. He and his brother Charles are lifelong libertarians and have quietly given more than a hundred million
dollars to right-wing causes.
On May 17th, a black-tie audience at the Metropolitan Opera House applauded as a tall, jovial-looking billionaire tOok the
stage. It was the seventieth annual spring gala of American Ballet Theatre, and David H. Koch was being celebrated for his
generosity as a member of the board of trustees; he had recently donated $2.5 million toward the company's upcoming season,
and had given many millions before that. Koch received an award while flanked by two of the gala's co-chairs, Blaine Trump,
in a peach-colored gown, and Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg, in emerald green. Kennedy's mother, Jacqueline Kennedy
Onassis, had been a patron of the ballet and, coincidentally, the previous owner of a Fifth Avenue apartment that Koch had
bought, in 1995, and then sold, eleven years later, for thirty-two million dollars, having found it too small.
The gala marked the social ascent of Koch, who, at the age of seventy, has become one of the city's most prominent
philanthropists. In 2008, he donated a hundred million dollars to modernize. Lincoln Center's New York State Theatre building,
which now bears his name. He has given twenty million to the American Museum of Natural History, whose dinosaur wing is
named for him. This spring, after noticing the decrepit state of the fountains outside the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Koch
pledged at least ten million dollars for their renovation. He is a trustee of the museum, perhaps the most coveted social prize in
the city, and serves on the board of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, where, after he donated more than forty million
dollars, an endowed chair and a research center were named for him.
One dignitary was conspicuously absent from the gala: the event's third honorary co-chair, Michelle Obama. Her office
said that a scheduling conflict had prevented her from attending. Yet had the First Lady shared the stage with Koch it might
have created an awkward tableau. In Washington, Koch is best known as part of a family that has repeatedly funded stealth
attacks on the federal government, and on the Obama Administration in particular.
With his brother Charles, who is seventy-four, David Koch owns virtually all of Koch Industries, a conglomerate,
headquartered in Wichita. Kansas, whose annual revenues are estimated to be a hundred billion dollars. The company has
grown spectacularly since their father, Fred, died, in 1967, and the brothers took charge. The Kochs operate oil refineries in
Alaska, Texas, and Minnesota, and control some four thousand miles of pipeline. Koch Industries owns Brawny paper towels,
Dixie. cups, Georgia-Pacific lumber, Staimnaster carpet, and Lycra, among other products. Forbes ranks it as the second-largest
private company in the country, after Cargill, and its consistent profitability has made David and Charles Koch—who, years
ago, bought out two other brothers—among the richest Men in America. Their combined fortune of thirty-five billion dollars is
exceeded only by those of Bill Gates and Warren Buffett.
The Kochs are longtime libertarians who believe in drastically lower personal and corporate taxes, minimal social services
for the needy, and much less oversight of industry—especially environmental regulation. These views dovetail with the
brothers' corporate interests. In a study released this spring, the University of Massachusetts at Amherst's Political Economy
Research Institute named Koch Industries one of the top ten air polluters in the United States.- And Greenpeace issued a report
identifying the company as a ""kingpin of climate science denial."" The report showed that, from 2005 to 2008, the Kochs vastly
outdid ExxonMobil in giving money to organizations fighting legislation related to climate change, unclerwriting'a huge
network of foundations, think tanks, and political front groups. Indeed, the brothers have funded opposition campaigns against
so many Obama Administration policies—from health-care reform to the economic-stimulus program----that, in political circles,
their ideological network is known as the Kochtopus.
In a statement, Koch Industries said that the Greenpeace report ""distorts the environmental record of our companies."" And. .
David Koch, in a recent, admiring article about him in New York, protested that the ""radical press"" had turned his family into
""whipping boys,"" and had exaggerated its influence on American politics. But Charles Lewis, the founder of the Center for
Public Integrity, a nonpartisan watchdog group, said, ""The Kochs are on a whole different level. There's no one else who has
spent this much money. The sheer dimension of it is what sets them apart. They have a pattern of lawbreaking, political
manipulation, and obfuscation. I've been in Washington since Watergate, and I've never seen anything like it. They are the
Standard Oil of our times.""
few weeks after the Lincoln Center gala, the advocacy wing of the Americans for Prosperity Foundation—an organization that
David Koch started, in 2004—held a different kind of gathering. Over the July 4th weekend, a summit called Texas Defending
the American Dream took place in a chilly hotel ballroom in Austin. Though Koch freely promotes his philanthropic ventures,
lie did not attend the summit, and his name was not in evidence. And on this occasion the audience was roused not by a,dance
performance but by a series of speakers denouncing President Barack Obama. Peggy Venable, the organizer of the summit,
warned that Administration officials ""have a socialist visiOn for this country.""
Five hundred people attended the summit, which served, in part, as a training session for Tea Party activists in Texas. An
advertisement cast the event as a populist uprising against vested corporate power. ""Today, the voices of average Americans are
being drowned out by lobbyists and special interests,"" it said. ""But you can do something about it."" The pitch made no mention
of its corporate funders. The White House has expressed frustration that such sponsors have largely eluded public notice. David .
Axelrod, Obama's senior adviser, said, ""What they don't say is that, in part, this is a grassroots citizens' movement brought to
you by a bunch of oil billionaires.""
In April, 2009, Melissa Cohlmia, a company spokesperson; denied that the Kochs had direct links to the Tea Party, saying
that Americans for Prosperity is ""an independent organization and Koch companies do not in any way direct their activities.""
.Later, she issued a statement: ""No funding has been provided by Koch companies, the Koch foundations, or Charles Koch or
David Koch specifically to support the tea parties."" David Koch told New York, ""I've never been to a tea-party event. No one
representing the tea party has ever even approached me.""
At the lectern in Austin, however, Venable—a longtime political operative who draws a salary from Americans for
Prosperity, and who has worked for Koch-funded political groups since 1994—spoke less warily: ""We love what the Tea
Parties are doing, because that's how we're going to take back America!"" she declared, as the crowd cheered. In a subsequent
interview, she described herself as an early member of the movement, joking, ""I was part of the Tea Party before it was cool!""
She explained that the role of Americans for Prosperity was to help ""educate"" Tea Party activists on policy details, and to give
them ""next-step training"" after their rallies, so that their political energy could be channelled ""more effectively."" And she noted
that Americans for Prosperity had provided Tea Party activists with lists of elected officials to target. She said of the Kochs.
""They're certainly our people. David's the chairman of our board. I've certainly met with them, and I'm very appreciative Of
what they do.""
Venable honored several Tea Party ""citizen leaders"" at the summit. The Texas branch of Americans for Prosperity gave its
Blogger of the Year Award to a young woman named Sibyl West. On June 14th, West, writing on her site, described Obama as
the ""cokehead in chief."" In an online thread, West speculated that the President was exhibiting symptoms of ""demonic
possession (aka schizophrenia, etc.)."" The summit featured several paid speakers, including Janine Turner, the actress best
known for her role on the television series ""Northern Exposure."" She declared, ""They don't want our children to know about
their rights. They don't want our children to know about a God!""
During a catered lunch, Venable introduced Ted Cruz, a former solicitor general of Texas, who told the crowd that Obama
was ""the most radical President ever to occupy the Oval Office,"" and had hidden from voters a secret agenda—""the government
taking over our economy and our lives."" Countering Obama, Cruz proclaimed, was the epic fight of our generation!"" As the
crowd rose to its feet and cheered, he quoted the defiant words of a Texan at the Alamo: ""Victory, or death!""
Americans for Prosperity has worked closely with the Tea Party since the movement's inception. In the weeks before the
first Tax Day protests, in April, 2009, Americans for Prosperity hosted a Web site offering supporters ""Tea Party Talking
Points."" The Arizona branch urged people to send tea bags to Obama; the Missouri branch urged members to sign up for
""Taxpayer Tea Party Registration"" and provided directions to nine protests. The group continues to stoke the rebellion. The
North Carolina branch recently launched a ""Tea Party Finder"" Web site, advertised as ""a hub for all the Tea Parties in North
Carolina.""
The anti-government fervor infusing the 2010 elections represents a political triumph for the Kochs. By giving money to
""educate,"" fund, and organize Tea Party protesters, they have helped turn their private agenda into a mass movement. Bruce
Bartlett, a conservative economist and a historian, who once worked at the National Center for Policy Analysis, a Dallas-based
think tank that the Kochs fund, said, ""The problem with the whole libertarian movement is that it's been all chiefs and no
Indians. There haven't been any actual people, like voters, who give a crap about it. So the problem for the Kochs has been
trying to create a movement."" With the emergence of the Tea Party, he said, ""everyone suddenly sees that for the first time there
are Indians out there—people who can provide real ideological power."" The Kochs, he said, are ""trying to shape and control and
channel the populist uprising into their own policies.""-
A Republican campaign consultant who has done research on behalf of Charles and David Koch said of the Tea Party, ""The
Koch brothers gave the money that founded it. It's like they put the seeds in the ground. Then the rainstorm comes, and the
frogs come out of the mud—and they're our candidates!""
The Kochs and their political operatives declined requests for interviews. Instead, a prominent New York public-relations
executive who is close with the Kochs put forward two friends: George Pataki, the former governor of New York, and Mortimer
Zuckerman, the publisher and real-estate magnate. Pataki, a Republican who received campaign donations from David Koch,
called him ""a patriot who cares deeply about his country."" Zuckerman praised David's ""gentle decency"" and the ""range of his
public interests.""
The Republican campaign consultant said of the family's political activities, ""To call them under the radar is an
understatement. They are underground!"" Another former Koch adviser said, ""They're smart. This right-wing, redneck stuff
works for them. They see this as a way to get things done without getting dirty themselves."" Rob Stein, a Democratic political
strategist who has studied the conservative movement's finances, said that the Kochs are ""at the epicenter of the anti-Obama
movement. But it's not just about Obama. They would have done the same to Hillary Clinton. They did the same with Bill •
Clinton. They are out to destroy progressivism.""
ddly enough, the fiercely capitalist Koch family owes part of its fortune to Joseph Stalin. Fred Koch was the son of a Dutch
printer who settled in Texas and ran a weekly newspaper. Fred attended M.I.T., where he earned a degree in chemical
engineering. In 1927, he invented a more efficient process for converting oil into gasoline; but, according to family lore,
America's major oil companies regarded him as a threat and shut him out of the industry. Unable to succeed at home, Koch
found work in the Soviet Union. In the nineteen-thirties, his company trained Bolshevik engineers and helped Stalin's regime
set up fifteen modern oil refineries. Over time, however, Stalin brutally purged several of Koch's Soviet colleagues. Koch was
deeply affected by the experience, and regretted his collaboration. He returned to the U.S. In the headquarters of his company,
Rock Island Oil & Refining, in Wichita, he kept photographs aimed at proving that some of those Soviet refineries had been
destroyed in the Second World War. Gus diZerega, a former friend of Charles Koch, recalled, ""As the Soviets became a
stronger military power, Fred felt a certain amount of guilt at having helped build them up. I think it bothered him a lot.""
In 1958, Fred Koch became one of the original members of the john Birch Society, the arch-conservative group known, in
part, for a highly skeptical view of governance and for spreading fears of a Communist takeover. Members considered President
Dwight D. Eisenhower to be a Communist agent. In a self-published broadside, Koch claimed that the Communists have
infiltrated both the Democrat and Republican Parties."" He wrote admiringly of Benito Mussolini's suppression of Communists
in Italy, and disparagingly of the American civil-rights movement. ""The colored man looms large in the Communist plan to take
over America,"" he warned. Welfare was a secret plot to attract rural blacks to cities, where they would foment ""a vicious race
war."" In a 1963 speech that prefigures the Tea Party's talk of a secret 'socialist plot, Koch predicted that Communists would
""infiltrate the highest offices of government in the U.S. until the President is a Communist, unknown to the rest of us.""
Koch married Mary Robinson, the daughter of a Missouri physician, and they had four sons: Freddie, Charles, and twins,
David and William. John Damgard, the president of the Futures Industry Association, was David's schoolmate and friend. He
recalled that Fred Koch was ""a real John Wayne type."" Koch emphasized rugged pursuits, taking his sons big-game hunting in
Africa, and requiring them to do farm labor at the family ranch. The Kochs lived in a stone mansion on a large compound across
from Wichita's country club; in the summer, the boys could hear their friends splashing in the pool, but they were not allowed
to join them. ""By instilling a work ethie in me at an early age, my father did me a big favor, although it didn't seem like a favor
back then,"" Charles has written. ""By the time I was eight, he made sure work occupied most of my spare time."" David Koch
recalled that his father also indoctrinated the boys politically. ""He was constantly speaking to us children about what was wrong
with government,"" he told Brian Doherty, an editor of the libertarian magazine Reason, and the author of ""Radicals for
Capitalism,"" a 2007 history of the libertarian movement. ""It's something I grew up with—a fundamental point of view that big
government was bad, and imposition of government controls on our lives and economic fortunes was not good.""
David attended Deerfield Academy, in Massachusetts, and Charles was sent to military school. Charles, David, and William
all earned engineering degrees at their father's alma mater, M.I.T., and later joined the family company. Charles eventually
assumed control, with David as his deputy; William's career at the company was less successful. Freddie went to Harvard and
studied playwriting at the Yale School of Drama. His father reportedly disapproved of him, and punished him financially.
(Freddie, through a spokesperson, denied this:)
In 1967, after Fred Koch died, of a heart attack, Charles renamed the business Koch Industries, in honor of his father. Fred
Koch's will made his sons extraordinarily wealthy. David Koch joked about his good fortune in a 2003 speech to alumni at
Deerfield, where, after pledging twenty-five million dollars, he was made the school's sole ""lifetime trustee."" He said, ""You
might ask: How does David Koch happen to have the wealth to be so generous? Well, let me tell you a story. It all started when
I was alittle boy. One day, my father gave me an apple. I soon sold it for five dollars and bought two apples and sold them for
ten. Then I bought four apples and sold them for twenty. Well, this went on day after day, week after week, month after month,
year after year, until my father died and left me three hundred million dollars!""
David and Charles had absorbed their father's conservative politics, but they did not share all his views, according to
diZerega, who befriended Charles in the mid-sixties, after meeting him while browsing in a John Birch Society bookstore in
Wichita. Charles eventually invited him to the Kochs' mansion, to participate in an informal political-discussion group. ""It was
pretty clear that Charles thought some of the Birch Society was bullshit,"" diZerega recalled.
DiZerega, who has lost touch with Charles, eventually abandOned right-wing views, and became a political-science
professor. He credits Charles with opening his mind to political philosophy, which set him on the path to academia; Charles is
one of three people to whom he dedicated his first book. But diZerega believes that the Koch brothers have followed a wayward
intellectual trajectory, transferring their father's paranoia about Soviet Communism to a distrust of the U.S. government, and
seeing its expansion, beginning with the New Deal, as a tyrannical threat to freedom. In an essay, posted on Beliefnet, diZerega
writes, ""As state socialism failed ... the target for many within these organizations shifted to any kind of regulation at all.
'Socialism' kept. being defined downwards.""
Members of the. John Birch Society developed.an interest in a school of Austrian economists who promoted free-market
ideals. Charles and David Koch were particularly influenced by the work of Friedrich von Hayek, the author of ""The Road to
Serfdom"" (1944), which argued that centralized government planning led, inexorably, to totalitarianism. Hayek'S belief in
unfettered capitalism has proved inspirational to many conservatives, and to anti-Soviet dissidents; lately, Tea Party supporters
have championed his work. In June, the talk-radio host Glenn Beck, who has supported the Tea Party rebellion, promoted ""The
Road to Serfdom"" on his show; the paperback soon became a No. 1 best-seller on Amazon. (Beck appears to be a fan of the
Kochs; in the midst of arecent on-air parody of Al Gore, Beck said, without explanation, ""I want to thank Charles Koch for this
information."" Beck declined to elaborate on the relationship.)
Charles and David also became devotees of a more radical thinker, Robert LeFevre, who favored the abolition of the state
but didn't like the label ""anarchist""; he called himself an ""autarchist."" LeFevre liked to say that ""government is a disease
masquerading as its own cure."" In 1956, he opened an institution called the Freedom School, in Colorado Springs. Brian
Doherty, of Reason, told me that ""LeFevre was an anarchist figure who won Charles's heart,"" and that the school was ""a tiny
world of people who thought the New Deal was a horrible mistake."" According to diZerega, Charles supported the school
financially, and even gave him money to take classes there.
Throughout the seventies, Charles and David continued to build Koch Industries. In 1980, William, with assistance from
Freddie, attempted to take over the company from Charles, who, they felt, had assumed autocratic control. In retaliation, the
company's board, which answered to Charles, fired William. (""Charles runs it all with an iron hand,"" Bruce Bartlett, the
economist, told me.) Lawsuits were filed, with William and Freddie on one side and Charles and David on the other. In 1983,
Charles and David bought out their brothers' share in the company for nearly a billion dollars. But the antagonism remained,
and litigation continued for seventeen more years, with the brothers hiring rival private investigators; in 1990, they walked past
one another with stony expressions at their mother's funeral. Eventually. Freddie moved to Monaco, which has no income tax.
He bought historic, estates in France. Austria, and elsewhere, filling them with art, antiques, opera scores, and literary
manuscripts. William founded his own energy company, Oxbow, and turned to yachting; he spent an estimated sixty-five
million dollars to win the America's Cup, in 1992.
With Charles as the undisputed chairman and C.E.O., Koch Industries expanded rapidly. Roger Altman, who heads the
investment-banking firm Evercore, told me that the company's performance has been ""beyond phenomenal."" Charles remained
in Wichita, with his wife and two children, guarding his privacy while supporting community charities. David moved to New
York City, where he is an executive vice-president of the company and the C.E.O. of its Chemical Technology Group. A
financial expert who knows Koch Industries well told me, ""Charles is the company. Charles runs it."" David, described by
associates as ""affable"" and ""a bit of a lunk,"" enjoyed for years the life of a wealthy bachelor. He rented a yacht in the South of
France and bought a waterfront home in Southampton, where he threw parties that the Web site New York Social Diary likened
to an ""East Coast version of Hugh Hefher's soirees."" In 1996, he married Julia Flesher, a fashion assistant. They live in a nine-
thousand-square-foot duplex at 740 Park Avenue, with their three children. Though David's manner is more cosmopolitan, and
more genial, than that of Charles, Brian Doherty, who has interviewed both brothers, couldn't think of a single issue on which
the brothers disagreed.
As their fortunes grew, Charles and David Koch became the primary underwriters of hard-line libertarian politics in
America. Charles's goal, as Doherty described it, was to tear the government ""out at the root."" The brothers' first major public
step came in 1979, when Charles persuaded David, then thirty-nine, to run for public office. They had become supporters of the
Libertarian Party, and were backing its Presidential candidate, Ed Clark, who was running against Ronald Reagan from the
right. Frustrated by the legal limits on campaign donations, they contrived to place David on the ticket, in the Vice-Presidential
slot; upon becoming a candidate, he could lavish as much of his personal fortune as he wished on the campaign. The ticket's
slogan was ""The Libertarian Party has only one source of funds: You."" In fact, its primary source of funds was David Koch,
who spent more than two million dollars on the effort.
Many of the ideas propounded in the 1980 campaign presaged the Tea Party movement. Ed Clark told The Nation that
libertarians were getting ready to stage ""a very big tea party,"" because people were ""sick to death"" of taxes. The Libertarian
Party platform called for the abolition of the F.B.I. and the C.I.A., as well as of federal regulatory agencies, such as the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the Department of Energy. The Party wanted to end Social Security, minimum-wage
laws, gun control, and all personal and corporate income taxes; it proposed the legalization of prostitution, recreational drugs,
and suicide. Government should be reduced to only one function: the protection of individual rights. William F. Buckley, Jr., a
more traditional conservative, called the movement ""Anarcho-Totalitarianism.""
That November, the Libertarian ticket received only one per cent of the vote. The brothers realized that their brand of
politics didn't sell at the ballot box. Charles Koch became openly scornful of conventional politics. ""It tends to be a nasty,
corrupting business,"" he told a reporter at the time. ""I'm interested in advancing libertarian ideas."" According to Doherty's
book, the .Kochs came to regard elected politicians as merely ""actors playing out a script."" A longtime confidant of the Kochs
told Doherty that the brothers wanted to ""supply the themes and words for the scripts."" In order to alter the direction of
America, they had to ""influence the areas where policy ideas percolate from: academia. and think tanks.""
fter the 1980 election, Charles and David Koch receded from the public arena. But they poured more than a hundred million
. dollars into dozens of seemingly independent organizations. Tax records indicate that in 2008 the three main Koch family
foundations gave money.to thirty-four political and policy organizations, three of which they founded, and several of which
they direct. The Kochs and their company have given additional millions to political campaigns, advocacy groups, and
lobbyists. The family's subterranean financial role has fuelled suspicion on the left: Lee Fang, of the liberal blog ThinkProgress,
has called the Kochs the billionaires behind the hate.""
Only the Kochs know precisely how much they have spent on politics. Public tax records show that between 1998 and 2008
the Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation spent more than forty-eight million dollars. The Claude R. Lambe Charitable
Foundation, which is controlled by Charles Koch and his wife, along with two company employees and an accountant, spent
more than twenty-eight million. The David H. Koch Charitable Foundation spent more than a hundred and twenty million.
Meanwhile, since 1998 Koch Industries has spent more than fifty million dollars on lobbying. Separately, the company's
political-action committee, KochPAC, has donated some eight million dollars to political campaigns, more than eighty
per cent of it to Republicans. So far in 2010, Koch Industries leads all other energy companies in political
contributions, as it has since 2006. In addition, during the past dozen years the Kochs and other family members
have personally spent more than two million dollars on political contributions. In the second quarter of 2010, David
Koch was the biggest individual contributor to the Republican Governors Association, with a million-dollar donation.
Other gifts by the Kochs may be untraceable; federal tax law permits anonymous personal donations to politically
active nonprofit groups.
In recent decades, members of several industrial dynasties have spent parts of their fortunes on a conservative agenda. In
the nineteen-eighties, the Olin family, which owns a chemicals-and-manufacturing conglomerate, became known for funding
right-leaning thinking in academia, particularly in law schools. And during the nineties Richard Mellon Scaife, a descendant of
Andrew Mellon, spent millions attempting to discredit President Bill Clinton. An Rabin-Havt, a vice-president at the
Democratic-leaning Web site Media Matters, said that the Kochs' effort is Unusual, in its marshalling of corporate and personal
funds: ""Their role, in terms of financial commitments, is staggering.""
Of course, Democrats give money, too. Their most prominent donor, the financier George Soros, runs a foundation, the
Open Society Institute, that has spent as much as a hundred million dollars a year in America. Soros has also made generous
private contributions to various Democratic campaigns, including Obama's. But Michael Vachon, his spokesman, argued that
Soros's giving is transparent, and that ""none of his contributions are in the service of his own economic interests."" The Kochs
have given millions of dollars to nonprofit groups that criticize environmental regulation and support lower taxes for industry.
Gus diZerega, the former friend, suggested that the Kochs' youthful idealism about libertarianism had largely devolved into a
rationale for corporate self-interest. He said of Charles, ""Perhaps he has confused making money with freedom.""
Some critics have suggested that the Kochs' approach has subverted the purpose of tax-exempt giving. By law, charitable
foundations must conduct exclusively nonpartisan activities that promote the public welfare. A 2004 report by the National
Committee for Responsive Philanthropy, a watchdog group, described the Kochs' foundations as being self-serving,
concluding, ""These foundations give money to nonprofit organizations that do research and advocacy on issues that impact the
profit margin of Koch Industries.""
The Kochs have gone well beyond their immediate self-interest, however, funding organizations that aim to push the
country in a libertarian. direction. Among the institutions that they have subsidized are the Institute for Justice, which files.
lawsuits opposing state and federal regulations; the Institute for Humane Studies, which underwrites libertarian academics; and
the Bill of Rights Institute, which promotes a conservative slant on the Constitution. Many of the organizations funded by the
Kochs employ specialists who write position Papers that are subsequently quoted by politicians and pundits. David Koch has
acknowledged that the family exerts tight ideological control. ""If we're going to give a lot of money, we'll make darn sure they •
spend it in a way that goes along with our intent,"" he told Doherty. ""And if they make a wrong turn and start doing things we
don't agree with, we withdraw funding.""
he Kochs' subsidization of a pro-corporate movement fulfills, in many ways, the vision laid out in a secret 1971 memo that
Lewis Powell. then a Virginia attorney, wrote two months before he was nominated to the Supreme Court. The antiwar
movement had turned its anger on defense contractors, such as Dow Chemical, and Ralph Nader was leading a public-interest
crusade against corporations. Powell, writing a report for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, urged American companies to fight
back. The greatest threat to free enterprise, he warned, was not Communism or the New Left but, rather, ""respectable elements
of society""—intellectuals, journalists, and scientists. To defeat them, he wrote, business leaders needed to wage a long-term,
• unified campaign to change public opinion.
Charles Koch seems to have approached both business and politics with the deliberation of an engineer. ""To bring about
social change,"" he told Doherty, requires ""a strategy"" that is ""vertically and horizontally integrated,"" spanning ""from idea
creation to policy development to education to grassroots organizations to lobbying to litigation to political action."" The project,
he admitted, was extremely ambitious. ""We have a radical philosophy,"" he said.
In 1977, the Kochs provided the funds to launch the nation's first libertarian think tank, the Cato Institute. According to the
'Center for Public Integrity, between 1986 and 1993 the Koch family gave eleven million dollars to the institute. Today Cato
has more than a hundred full-time employees, and its experts and policy papers are widely quoted and respected by the
mainstream media. It describes itself as nonpartisan, and its scholars have at times been critical of both parties. But it has
consistently pushed for corporate tax cuts, reductions in social services, and laissez-faire environmental policies.
When President Obama, in a 2008 speech, described the science on global warming as ""beyond dispute,"" the Cato Institute
took out a full-page ad in the Times to contradict him. Cato's resident scholars have relentlessly criticized political attempts to
stop global warming as expensive, ineffective, and unnecessary. Ed Crane, the Cato Institute's founder and president, told me
that ""global-warming theories give the government more control of the economy.""
Cato scholars have been particularly energetic in promoting the Climategate scandal. Last year, private e-mails of climate
scientists at the University of East Anglia, in England, were mysteriously leaked, and their exchanges appeared to suggest a
willingness to falsify data in order to buttress the idea that global warming is real. In the two weeks after the e-mails went
public, one Cato scholar gave more than twenty media interviews trumpeting the alleged scandal. But five independent inquiries
have since exonerated the researchers, and nothing was found in their e-mails or data to discredit the scientific consensus on
global warming. •
Nevertheless, the controversy succeeded in spreading skepticism about climate change. Even though the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration recently issued a report concluding that the evidence for global warming is unequivocal, more
Americans are convinced than at any time since 1997 that scientists have exaggerated the seriousness of global warming. The
Kochs promote this statistic on their company's Web site but do not mention the role that their funding has played in fostering
such doubt.
In a 2002 memo, the Republican political consultant Frank Luntz wrote that so long as ""voters believe there is no consensus
about global warming within the scientific community' the status quo would prevail. The key for opponents of environmental
reform, he said, was to question the science—a public-relations strategy that the tobacco industry used effectively for years to
forestall regulation. The Kochs have funded many sources of environmental skepticism, such as the Heritage Foundation, which
has argued that ""scientific facts gathered in the past 10 years do not support the notion of catastrophic human-made warming.""
The brothers have given money to more obscure groups, too, such as the Independent Women's Forum, which opposes the
presentation of global warming as a scientific fact in American public schools. Until 2008, the group was run by Nancy
Pfotenhauer, a former lobbyist for Koch Industries. Mary Beth Jarvis, a vice-president of a Koch subsidiary, is on the group's
board.
Naomi Oreskes, a professor of history and science studies at the University of California, San Diego, is the co-author of
""Merchants of Doubt,"" a new book that chronicles various attempts by American industry to manipulate public opinion on
science. She noted that the Kochs, as the heads of ""a company with refineries and pipelines,"" have ""a lot at stake."" She added,
""If the answer is to phase out fossil fuels, a different group of people are going to be making money, so we shouldn't be
surprised that they're fighting tooth and nail.""
David Koch told New York that he was unconvinced that global warming has been caused by human activity. Even if it has
been, he said, the heating of the planet will be beneficial, resulting in longer growing seasons in the Northern Hemisphere. ""The
Earth will be able to support enormously more people because far greater land area will be available to produce food,"" he said.
n the mid-eighties, the Kochs provided millions of dollars to George Mason University, in Arlington, Virginia, to set up another
think tank. Now known as the Mercatus Center, it promotes itself as ""the world's premier university source for market-oriented
ideas—bridging the gap between academic ideas and real-world problems."" Financial records show that the Koch family
foundations have contributed more than thirty million dollar's to George Mason, much of which has gone to the Mercatus
Center, a nonprofit organization. ""It's ground zero for deregulation policy in Washington,"" Rob Stein, the Democratic strategist,
said. It is an unusual arrangement. ""George Mason is a public university, and receives public funds,"" Stein noted. ""Virginia is
hosting an institution that the Kochs practically control.""
The founder of the Mercatus Center is Richard Fink, formerly an economist. Fink heads Koch Industries' lobbying
operation in Washington. In addition, he is the president of the Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation, the president of the
Claude R. Lambe Charitable Foundation, a director of the Fred C. and Mary R. Koch Foundation, and a director and co-
founder, with David Koch, of the Americans for Prosperity Foundation.
Fink, with his many titles, has become the central nervous system of the Kochtopus. He appears to have supplanted Ed
Crane, the head of the Cato Institute, as the brothers' main political lieutenant. Though David remains on the board at Cato,
Charles Koch has fallen out with Crane. Associates suggested to me that Crane had been insufficiently respectful of Charles's
management philosophy, which he distilled into a book called ""The Science of Success,"" and trademarked under the name
Market-Based Management, or M.B.M. In the book. Charles recommends instilling a company's corporate culture with the
competitiveness of the marketplace.. Koch describes M.B.M. as a ""holistic system"" containing ""five dimensions: vision, virtue
and talents, knowledge processes, decision rights and incentives."" A top Cato Institute official told me that Charles ""thinks he's
a genius. He's the emperor, and he's convinced he's wearing clothes."" Fink, by contrast, has been far more embracing of
Charles's ideas. (Fink, like the Kochs, declined to. be interviewed.)
At a 1995 conference for philanthropfsts, Fink adopted the language of economics when speaking about the Mercatus
Center's purpose. He said that grant-makers should use think tanks and political-action groups to convert intellectual raw
materials into policy ""products.""
The Wall Street Journal has called the Mercatus Center ""the most important think tank you've never heard of,"" and noted
that fourteen of the twenty-three regulations that President George W. Bush placed on a ""hit list"" had been suggested first by
Mercatus scholars. Fink told the paper that the Kochs have ""other means of fighting [their] battles,"" and that the Mercatus
Center does riot actively promote the company's private interests. But Thomas McGarity, a law professor at the University of
Texas, who specializes in environmental issues, told me that ""Koch has been constantly in trouble with the E.P.A., and
Mercatus has constantly hammered on the agency."" An environmental lawyer who has clashed with the Mercatus Center called
it ""a means of laundering economic aims."" The lawyer explained the strategy: ""You take corporate money and give it to a
neutral-sounding think tank,"" which ""hires people with pedigrees and academic degrees who put out credible-seeming studies.
But they all coincide perfectly with the economic interests of their funders.""
In 1997, for instance, the E.P.A. moved to reduce surface ozone, a form of pollution caused, in part, by emissions from oil
refineries. Susan Dudley, an economist who became a top official at the 'Mercatus Center, criticized the proposed rule. The
E.P.A., she argued, had not taken into account that smog-free skies would result in more cases of skin cancer. She projected that
if pollution were controlled it would cause up to eleven thousand additional cases of skin cancer each year.
In 1999, the District of Columbia Circuit Court took 'up Dudley's smog argument. Evaluating the E.P.A. rule, the court
found that the E.P.A. had ""explicitly disregarded"" the ""possible health benefits of ozone."" In another part of the opinion, the
court ruled, 2-1, that the E.P.A. had overstepped its authority in calibrating standards for ozone emissions. As the Constitutional
Accountability Center, a think tank, revealed, the judges in the majority had previously attended legal junkets, on a Montana
ranch, that were arranged by the Foundation for Research on Economics and the Environment—a group funded by Koch family
foundations. The judges have claimed that the ruling was unaffected by their attendance.
deas don't happen on their own,"" Matt Kibbe, the president of Freedom Works, a Tea Party advocacy group, told me.
""Throughout history, ideas need patrons."" The Koch brothers, after helping to create Cato and Mercatus, concluded that think
tanks alone were not enough to effect change. They needed a mechanism to deliver those ideas to the street, and to attract the
public's support. in 1984, David Koch and Richard Fink created yet another organization. and Kibbe joined them. The group,
Citizens for a Sound Economy, seemed like a grassroots movement, but according to the Center for Public Integrity it was
sponsored principally by the Kochs, who provided $7.9 million between 1986 and 19.93. Its mission, Kibbe said, ""was to take
these heavy ideas and translate them for mass America.... We read the same literature Obama did about nonviolent
revolutions--Saul _Minsky, Gandhi, Martin Luther King. We studied the idea of the Boston Tea Party as an example of
nonviolent social change. We learned we needed boots on the ground to sell ideas, not candidates."" Within a few years, the
group had mobilized fifty paid field workers, in twenty-six states, to rally voters behind the Kochs' agenda. David and Charles,
according to one participant, were ""very controlling, very top down. You can't build an organization with them. They run it.""
Around this time, the brothers faced a political crisis. In 1989, the Senate Select Committee on Indian Affairs investigated
their business and released a scathing report accusing Koch Oil of ""a widespread and sophisticated scheme to steal crude oil
from Indians and others through fraudulent mismeasuring."" The Kochs admitted that they had improperly taken thirty-one
million dollars' worth of crude oil, but said that it had been accidental. Charles Koch told committee investigators that oil
measurement is ""a very uncertain art.""
To defend its reputation, Koch IndustrieS hired Robert Strauss, then a premier Washington lobbyist; the company soon
opened an office in the city. A grand jury was convened to investigate the allegations, but it eventually disbanded, without
issuing criminal charges. According to the Senate report, after the committee hearings Koch operatives delved into the personal
lives of committee staffers, even questioning an ex-wife. Senate investigators were upset by the Kochs' tactics. Kenneth Batten,
the counsel to the Senate committee, said, ""These people have amassed such unaccountable power!'
.'
By •1993, when Bill Clinton became President, Citizens for a Sound Economy had become a prototype for the kind of
corporate-backed opposition campaigns that have proliferated during the Obama era. The group waged a successful assault on
Clinton's proposed B.T.U. tax on energy, for instance, running advertisements, staging media events, and targeting opponents.
And it mobilized anti-tax rallies outside the Capitol—rallies that NPR described as ""designed to strike fear into the hearts of
wavering Democrats."" Dan Glickman, a former Democratic congressman from Wichita, who supported the B.I.U. tax, recalled,
""I'd been in Congress eighteen years. The Kochs actually engaged against me and funded my opponent. They used a lot of
'resources and effort—their employees, too."" Glickman suffered a surprise defeat. ""I can't prove it, but I think I was probably
their victim,"" he said.
The Kochs continued to disperse their money, creating slippery organizations with generic-sounding names, and this made
it difficult to ascertain the extent of their influence in Washington. In 1990, Citizens for a Sound Economy created a spinoff
group, Citizens for the Environment, which called acid rain and other environmental problems ""myths."" When the
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette investigated the matter, it discovered that the spinoff group had ""no citizen membership of its own.""
In 1997, another Senate investigation began looking into what a minority report called ""an audacious plan to pour millions
of dollars in contributions into Republican campaigns nationwide without disclosing the amount or source,"" in order to evade
campaign-finance laws. A shell corporation, Triad Management, had paid more than three million dollars for attack ads in
twenty-six House races and three Senate races. More than half of the advertising money came from an obscure nonprofit group,
the Economic Education Trust. The Senate committee's minority report suggested that ""the trust was financed in whole or in
part by Charles and David Koch of Wichita, Kansas."" The brothers were suspected of having secretly paid for the attack ads,
most of which aired in states where Koch Industries did business. In Kansas, where Triad Management was especially active,
the funds may have played a decisive role in four of six federal races. The Kochs, when asked by reporters if they had given the
money, refused to comment. In i998, however, the Wall Street Journal confirmed that a consultant on the Kochs' payroll had
been involved in the scheme. Charles Lewis, of the Center for Public Integrity, described the scandal as ""historic. Triad was the
first time a major corporation used a cutout""—a front operation—""in a threatening way. Koch Industries was the poster child of
a company run amok.""
uring the Clinton Administration, the energy industry faced increased scrutiny and regulation. In the mid-nineties, the Justice
Department filed two lawsuits against Koch Industries, claiming that it was responsible for more than three hundred oil spills,
which had released an estimated three million gallons of oil into lakes and rivers. The penalty was potentially as high as two
hundred and fourteen million dollars. In a settlement. Koch Industries paid a record thirty-million-dollar civil fine, and agreed to
spend five million dollars on environmental projects.
In 1999, a jury found Koch Industries guilty of negligence and malice in the deaths of two Texas teen-agers in an explosion
that resulted from a leaky underground butane pipeline. (In 2001, the company paid an undisclosed settlement.) And in the final
months of the Clinton Presidency the Justice Department levelled a ninety-seven-count indictment against the company, for
covering up the discharge of ninety-one tons of benzene, a carcinogen, from its refinery in Corpus Christi, Texas. The company
was liable •for three hundred and fifty million dollars in fines, and four Koch employees faced up to thirty-five years in prison.
The Koch Petroleum Group eventually pleaded guilty to one criminal charge of covering up environmental violations, including
the falsification of documents, and paid a twenty-million-dollar fine. David Uhlmann, a career prosecutor who, at the time,
headed the environmental-crimes section at the Justice Department, described the suit as ""one of the most significant cases ever
brought under the Clean Air Act."" He added, ""Environmental crimes are almost always motivated by economics and arrogance,
and in the Koch case there was a healthy dose of both.""
During the 2000 election campaign, Koch Industries spent some nine hundred thousand dollars to support the candidacies
of George W. Bush and other Republicans. During the Bush years, Koch Industries and other fossil-fuel companies enjoyed
remarkable prosperity. The 2005 energy bill, which Hillary Clinton dubbed the Dick Cheney Lobbyist Energy Bill, offered
enormous subsidies and tax breaks for energy companies. The Kochs have cast themselves as deficit hawks, but, according to a
study by Media Matters, their companies have benefitted from nearly a hundred million dollars in government contracts since
2000.
In 2004, Citizens for a Sound Economy was accused of illegitimately throwing its weight behind Bush's reelection. The
group's Oregon branch had attempted to get Ralph Nader on the Presidential ballot, in order to dilute Democratic support for
John Kerry. Critics argued that it was illegal, for a tax-exempt nonprofit organization to donate its services for partisan political
purposes. (A complaint was filed with the Federal Election Commission; it was dismissed.)
That year, internal rivalries at Citizens for a Sound Economy caused the organization to split apart. David Koch and Fink
started a new group, Americans for Prosperity, and they hired Tim Phillips to run it. Phillips was a political veteran who had
worked with Ralph Reed, the evangelical leader and Republican activist, co-founding Century Strategies, a campaign-
consulting company that became notorious for its ties to the disgraced lobbyist Jack Abramoff. Phillips's online biography
describes him as an expert in ""grasstops"" and ""grassroots"" political organizing. The Kochs' choice of Phillips signalled an even
greater toughness. The conservative operative Grover Norquist, who is known for praising ""throat slitters"" in politics, called
Phillips ""a grownup who can make things happen.""
Last year, Phillips told the Financial Times that Americans for Prosperity had only eight thousand registered members.
Currently, its Web site claims that the group has ""1.2 million activists."" Whatever its size, the Kochs' political involvement has
been intense; a former employee of the Cato Institute told me that Americans for Prosperity ""was micromanaged by the Kochs.""
And the brothers' investment may well have paid off: Americans for Prosperity, in concert with the family's other
organizations, has been instrumental in disrupting the Obama Presidency.
In January, 2008, Charles Koch wrote in his company newsletter that America could be on the verge of ""the greatest loss of
liberty and prosperity since the 1930s."" That October, Americans for Prosperity held a conference of conservative operatives at
a Marriott hotel outside Washington. Erick Erickson, the editor-in-chief of the conservative blog RedState.com, took the lectern,
thanked David Koch, and vowed to ""unite and fiaht ... the armies of the left!"" Sodn after Obama assumed office, Americans
for Prosperity launched ""Porkulus"" rallies against Obama's stimulus-spending measures. Then the Mercatus Center released a
report claiming that stimulus funds had been directed disproportionately toward Democratic districts; eventually, the author was
forced to correct the report, but not before Rush Limbaugh, citing.the paper, had labelled Obama's program ""a slush fund,"" and
Fox News and other conservative outlets had echoed the sentiment. (Phil Kerpen, the vice-president for policy at Americans for
Prosperity, is a contributor to the Fox News Web site. Another officer at Americans for Prosperity, Walter Williams, often
guest-hosts for Limbaugh.)
Americans for Prosperity also created an offshoot, Patients United Now, which organized what Phillips has estimated to be
more than three hundred rallies against health-care reform. Atone rally, an effigy of a Democratic congressman was hung; at
another, protesters unfurled a banner depicting corpses from Dachau. The group also helped organize the ""Kill the Bill"" protests
outside the Capitol, in March, where Democratic supporters of health-care reform alleged that they were spat on and cursed at.
Phillips was a featured speaker.
Americans for Prosperity has held at least eighty events targeting cap-and-trade legislation, which is aimed at making
industries pay for the air pollution that they create. Speakers for the group claimed, with exaggeration, that even back-yard
barbecues and kitchen stoves would be taxed. The group was also involved in the attacks on Obama's ""green jobs"" czar, Van
Jones, and waged a crusade against international climate talks. Casting, his group as a champion of ordinary workers who would
be hurt by environmentalists, Phillips went to Copenhagen last year and staged a protest outside the United Nations conference
on climate change, declaring, ""We're a grassroots organization.... 1 think it's unfortunate when wealthy children of wealthy
families . want to send unemployment rates in the United States up to twenty per cent.""
Grover Norquist, who holds a weekly meeting for conservative leaders in Washington, including representatives from
Americans for Prosperity, told me that last summer's raucous rallies were pivotal in undermining Obama's agenda. The
Republican leadership in Congress, he said, ""couldn't have clone it without August, when people went out on the streets. It
discouraged deal-makers""—Republicans who might otherwise have worked constructively with Obama. Moreover, the
appearance of growing public opposition to Obama affected corporate donors on K Street. ""K Street is a three-billion-dollar
weathervane,"" Norquist said. ""When Obama was strong, the Chamber of Commerce said, 'We can work with the Obama
Administration.' But that changed when thousands of people went into the street and 'terrorized' congressmen. August is what
changed it. Now that Obama is weak, people are getting tough.""
As the first anniversary of Obama's election approached, David Koch came to the Washington area to attend a triumphant
Americans for Prosperity gathering. Obama's poll numbers were falling fast. Not .a single Republican senator was working with
the Administration on health care, or much else. Pundits were writing about Obama's political ineptitude, and Tea Party groups
were accusing the President of initiating ""a government takeover."" In a speech, Koch said, ""Days like today bring to reality the
vision of our board of directors when we started this organization, five years ago."" He went on, ""We envisioned a mass
movement, a state-based one, but national in scope, of hundreds of thousands of American citizens from all walks of life
standing up and fighting for the economic freedoms that made our nation the most prosperous society in history.... Thankfully,
the stirrings from California to Virginia, and from Texas to Michigan, show that more and more of our fellow-citizens are
beginning to see the same truths as we do."" .
While Koch didn't explicitly embrace the Tea Party movement that day, more recently he has come close to doing so,
praising it for demonstrating the ""powerful visceral hostility in the body politic against the massive increase in government
power, the massive efforts to socialize this country."" Charles Koch, in a newsletter sent to his seventy thousand employees,
compared the Obama Administration to the regime of the Venezuelan strongman Hugo Chavez. The Kochs' sense of
imperilment is somewhat puzzling. Income inequality in America is greater than it has been since the nineteen-twenties, and
since the seventies the tax rates of the wealthiest have fallen more than those of the middle class. Yet the brothers' message has
evidently resonated with voters: a recent poll found that fifty-five per cent of Americans agreed that Obama is a socialist.
Americans for Prosperity, meanwhile, has announced that it will spend an additional forty-five million dollars before the
midterm elections, in November. Although the group is legally prohibited from directly endorsing candidates, it nonetheless
plans to target some fifty House races and half a dozen Senate races, staging rallies, organizing door-to-door canvassing, and
running ads aimed at ""educating voters about where candidates stand.""
Though the Kochs have slowed Obama's momentum, their larger political battle is far from won. Richard Fink, interviewed
by FrumForum.com this spring, said, ""If you look at where we've gone from the year 2000 to now, with the expansion of
government spending and a debt burden that threatens to bankrupt the country, it doesn't look very good at all."" He went on, ""It
looks like the infrastructure that was built and ruirtitred has not carried the day."" He suggested that the Kochs needed ""to get
more into the practical, day-to-day issues of governing.""
n 1991, David Koch was badly injured in a plane crash.in Los Angeles. He was the sole passenger in first class to survive. As he
was recovering, a routine physical exam led to the discovery of prostate cancer. Koch received treatment, settled down, started a
family, and reconsidered his life. As he told Portfolio, ""When you're the only one who survived in the front of the plane and
everyone.else died—yeah, you think, 'My God, the good Lord spared me for some greater purpose.' My joke is that I've been
busy ever since, doing all the good work 1 can think of, so He can have confidence in me.""
Koch began giving spectacularly large donations to the arts and sciences. And he became a patron of cancer research,
focussing on prostate cancer. In addition to his gifts to Sloan-Kettering, he gave fifteen million dollars to New York-
Presbyterian Hospital, a hundred and twenty-five million to M.I.T. for cancer research, twenty million to Johns Hopkins
University, and twenty-five million to the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, in Houston. In response to his generosity, Sloan-
Kettering gave Koch its Excellence in Corporate Leadership Award. In 2004, President Bush named him to the National Cancer
Advisory Board, which guides the National.Cancer Institute.
Koch's corporate and political roles, however, may pose conflicts of interest. For example, at the same time that David
Koch has been casting himself as a champion in the fight against cancer, Koch Industries has been lobbying to prevent the
E.P.A. from classifying formaldehyde, which the company produces in great quantities, as a ""known carcinogen"" in humans.
Scientists have long known that formaldehyde causes cancer in rats, and several major scientific studies have concluded
that formaldehyde causes cancer in human beings—including one published last year by the National Cancer Institute, on
•whose advisory board Koch sits. The study tracked twenty-five thousand patients for an average of forty years; subjects exposed
to higher amounts of formaldehyde had significantly higher rates of leukemia. These results helped lead an expert panel within
the National Institutes of Health to conclude that formaldehyde should be categorized as a known carcinogen, and be strictly
controlled by the government. Corporations have resisted regulations on formaldehyde for decades, however, and Koch
Industries has been a large funder of members of Congress who have stymied the E.P.A., requiring it to defer new regulations
until more studies are completed.
Koch Industries became a major producer of the chemical in 2005, after it bought Georgia-Pacific, the paper and wood-
products company, for twenty-one billion dollars. Georgia-Pacific manufactures formaldehyde in its chemical division, and uses
it to produce various wood products, such as plywood and laminates. Its annual production capacity for formaldehyde is 2.2
billion pounds. Last December, Traylor Champion, Georgia-Pacific's vice-president of environmental affairs, sent a formal
letter of protest to federal health authorities. He wrote that the company ""strongly disagrees"" with the N.I.H. panel's conclusion
that formaldehyde should be treated as a known human carcinogen. David Koch did not recuse himself from the National
Cancer Advisory Board, or divest himself of company stock, while his company was directly lobbying the government to keep
formaldehyde on the market. (A board spokesperson said that the issue of formaldehyde had not come up.)
James Fluff, an associate director at the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences, a division of the N.I.H., told
me that it was ""disgusting"" for Koch to be serving on the National Cancer Advisory Board: ""It's just not good for public health.
Vested interests should not be on the board."" He 'went on, ""Those boards are very important. They're very influential as to
whether N.C.I. goes into formaldehyde or not. Billions of dollars are involved in formaldehyde.""
Harold Vannus, the director of the National Cancer Institute, knows David Koch from Memorial Sloan-Kettering, which he
used to run. He said that, at Sloan-Kettering, ""a lot of people who gave to us had large business interests. The one thing we
wouldn't tolerate in our board members is tobacco."" When told of Koch Industries' stance on formaldehyde, Varmus said that
he was ""surprised.""
he David H. Koch Hall of Human Origins, at the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History, is a multimedia
exploration of the theory that mankind evolved in response to climate change. At the main entrance, viewers are confronted
with a giant graph charting the Earth's temperature over the past ten million years, which notes that it is far cooler now than it
was ten thousand years ago. Overhead, the text reads, ""HUMANS EVOLVED IN RESPONSE TO A CHANGING WORLD."" The
message, as amplified by the exhibit's Web site, is that ""key human adaptations evolved in response to
environmental instability."" Only at the end of the exhibit, under the headline ""OUR SURVIVAL CHALLENGE,"" is it noted
that levels of carbon dioxide are higher now than they have ever been, and that they are projected to increase
dramatically in the next century. No cause is given for this development; no mention is made of any possible role
played by fossil fuels. The exhibit makes it seem part of a natural continuum. The accompanying text says, ""During
the period in which humans evolved, Earth's temperature and the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
fluctuated together."" An interactive game in the exhibit suggests that humans will continue to adapt to climate
change in the future. People may build ""underground cities;"" developing ""short, compact bodies"" or ""curved spines,""
so that ""moving around in tight spaces will be no problem.""
Such ideas uncannily echo the Koch message. The company's January newsletter to employees, for instance, argueS that
""fluctuations in the earth's climate predate humanity,"" and concludes, ""Since we can't control Mother Nature, let's figure out
how to get along with her changes."" Joseph Romm, a physicist who runs the Web site ClirnateProgress.org, is infuriated by the
Smithsonian's presentation. ""The whole exhibit whitewashes the modern climate issue,"" he said. ""I think the Kochs wanted to
be seen as some sort of high-minded company, associated with the greatest natural-history and science museum in the country.
But the truth is, the exhibit is underwritten by big-time polluters, who are underground .funders of action to stop efforts to deal
with this threat to humanity. I think the Smithsonian should have drawn the line.""
Cristian Samper, the museum's director, said that the exhibit is not about climate change, and described Koch as ""one of the
best donors we've had, in my tenure here, because he's very interested in the content, but completely hands off."" He noted, ""1.
don't know all the details.of his involvement in other issues.""
The Kochs have long depended on the public's not knowing all the details about them. They have been content to operate what
David Koch has called ""the largest company that you've never heard of."" But with the growing prominence of the Tea Party,
and with increased awareness of the Kochs' ties to the movement, the brothers may find it harder to deflect scrutiny. Recently,
President °barna took aim at the Kochs' political network. Speaking at a Democratic National Committee fund-raiser, in
Austin, he warned supporters that the Supreme Court's recent ruling in the Citizens United case—which struck down laws
prohibiting direct Corporate spending on campaigns—had made it even easier for big companies to hide behind ""groups with
harmless-sounding names like Americans for Prosperity."" Obama said, ""They don't have to say who, exactly, Americans for
Prosperity are. You don't know if it's a foreign-controlled corporation""—or even, he added, ""a big oil company."""
6258,"Thank you and your wonderful family
Harold Hongju Koh
The Legal Adviser
U.S. Department of State
Suite 6421
2201 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20520-6421
202 647 9598 office
mobile
202 647 7096 fax"
6259,Anytime - I've got my phone with me.
6262,"Am in office today.
Meetings at 8:30am, 9am, 9:30, 10am and then none b/w 11am - 2pm.
cdm
--"
6266,"Madame Secretary:
I'd like to update you on our efforts to engage with Bolivia.
You engaged personally and through Maria Echaveste as we've tried to think and act creatively to extract positives from
a difficult starting point. Echaveste visited Bolivia in June and September 2009, and I traveled there this June to
underline our commitment to better relations; you met with FM Choquehuanca at the OAS GA in Lima later that month;
and Labor Secretary Solis and Maria Otero traveled to President Morales' inauguration in January 2010.
Best Regards,
Arturo"
6268,"Our mission to the OECD wants to announce USG support for Angel Gurria's reappointment at OECD Secretary
General. Bob and Froman both support. Most other countries have already said they support; there are no other
candidates; and the OECD has never not given a SG a second term. Nobody in the USG has raised objections. Just
wanted to flag for you in case you had concerns."
6269,"I have been monitoring the wikipedia situation and working with the R team to try and be as prepared as we can.
I am heading to Indonesia on Monday for the opening of the new American Center and then to Malaysia where, among
other things, I plan to work with Paul Jones on the English language initiative.
I will be traveling all day Monday so unfortunately out of touch for about 18 hours. I will be in contact with my office as
soon as I land and can always cut the trip short if necessary, although, under the circumstances I think it is important to
keep to our schedules.
As we have discussed, one of the main drivers of our PD strategy is to ensure we have strong relations in all sectors to
help us weather the invitable storms in our relationships and at this point it looks like we have a hurricane on the
horizon.
Take care and look forward to seeing you when we both get back.
Jm"
6270,"Here is the latest (as of Saturday at 12:30 am). This reflects the changes we discussed in our call on Wednesday, as well
as feedback from assorted vetters. I've also trimmed and tweezed it down to about
6,100 words. We should probably attempt to trim some more if we can.
It's a very long piece. -- Lissa"
6275,"That would be great. Fax is
Sent from my iPhone. Apologies for any typos.
On Aug 28, 2010, at 8:32 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> Thx. I'll work on it and may I fax back to you my changes?
>"
6276,"Hrc, pis see note that jimmy carter sent to lauren re tues. Do you want us to have jeff bader join the meeting?"
6277,"Will do! Thank you.
-----"
6278,"RELEASE IN PART
B6
Thank you!
Hope you are having a happy holiday despite the Wiki work
See you Monday
On 11/25/10 12:35 PM, ""Evergreen"" <Hdr22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> Philippe--
And expressing my thanks for all
> you've done for me and our efforts over the last year. Enjoy the
> day--H"
6279,"Agree. I love the AFT/NEA idea. Have you raised it with them? If they are interested I'd love to explore a global
partnership with them since there are a number of countries interested in expanding our programs and the exisiting
structures — peace corp, fulbright, etc just aren't organized to handle something like this.
See you when I get back.
Jm.
Jm"
6281,202 647 8947
6282,"Perfect. See you next week.
Jrn"
6283,I think I can track down this binder today and get it to you.
6284,"Will do! Thnx, E
-----"
6285,"RELEASE IN PART
B5, B6
yep
On Sat, Nov 27, 2010 at 6:19 PM, Huma Abedin <
ok we will follow up on this
> wrote: B6"
6286,Thx. Will be home in an hour and will check.
6287,We will fax a version of these to you shortly.
6289,Roger.
6290,Yep -- working through them now.
6291,"Very much so. I am also making a few changes as well, and there are a couple of places where I have questions on your
edits. I'll have a new draft back to you in 2 hours."
6292,Fyi
6293,"Yes, got them. Jake wanted to put them in himself so he could make his own fixes at te same time. He will send us all a
clean version."
6294,Fyi
6295,"sbwhoeop
Saturday, August 28, 2010 2:00 PM
Re: H: Can someone print out this poll from Brookings on Arab public opinion for you?
Sid
good."
6296,"Valenzuela, Arturo A <ValenzuelaAA@state.gov>
Saturday, August 28, 2010 2:05 PM
Valmoro, Lona J; Huma Abedin
Re: From Arturo re Bolivia
Happy to discuss. I am on leave in Florida--- returning to DC Wednesday the 1st around 2:30 pm-- could come in after
3:00. Am available any time Thursday afternoon or Friday B6
the 3rd. Best, Arturo"
6297,Ok
6298,"will all be gone tonight, we were waiting for meetings to finish.
can come around now"
6300,Burns recommends that we hold you back for a call to Menon on Monday. That is the current plan.
6301,"I'm so glad you took the time to see it. It's both practical/achievable and visionary. And I'm wondering if that stellar
group of CEOs etc that Madeleine, Walter, and Muhtar have assembled cdnt spearhead a drive to make it a reality. AM"
6303,"We are now tracking for Tues to roll out next steps, so l's wondering whether you can talk to Bibi tomorrow evening.
Would mean doing it on the plane. But probably makes more sense. Thoughts?"
6305,"I've just sent Jon my updated version. I know you said you just want this to be done — and I don't blame you — but take a
look at what I've done. I've flagged a few things I think should change. With one more pass by you, and a few more
adjustments by us, I think this is good to go for Monday."
6307,FYI
6308,"""FRAUD"" IN CHAOTIC ELECTIONS, CALL FOR CANCELLATION"
6309,See below suggested holding press line
6310,Please print for HRC in color if possible.
6312,"Cc:
Samuel Berger
Saturday, August 28, 2010 5:30 PM
H
Samuel Berger
Principles_Design_Working Draft.pdf; Principles_Design_Working Draft.pdf
HRC: I am attaching a matrix of prior language that has been used in connection with the major Israeli-Palestinian
issues.
It was prepared in the context of language the US might use if it were to articulate principles, not principles to which the
parties might agree, but it provides most of the language that has been used in the past, with citations.
The USIP Middle East group Steve and I chair decided that rather than issue a static report, we would
prepare/commission a series of timely and specific papers that we would provide privately to the Administration. (I have
sent some of those to your office). They include papers on security, Palestinian institution building, public attitudes in
Israel and the territories, etc.
I will deliver a set of those papers to your office on Monday
If it would be useful, I would be happy to convene a small, private discussion with some of the sharpest people in the
group, or give you some names.
A few observations following up our call this am.:
(1) This (a Framework Agreement) is very difficult but I don't think impossible. If Bibi can say he has secured
unprecedented commitments on security and established the principle of a Jewish state, he could decide to
play the historic leader. If he is uncompromising, he will have to deal with the consequences for US-Israeli
relations. His opt out, of course, is to blame the Pais, but we will be ""in the room"".
(2) I think this should be a negotiation that goes from principle to paper rather than the other way around, i.e. not
an early exchange of documents that dig each side into its positions. The two leaders need to feel each
other out first at the level of first principles, to be distilled after a period by the U.S.
(3) Not sure we need to be in every meeting.. Ultimately, they need to establish some trust. But we (you or
Mitchell) need to be present enough to make sure that there is no misunderstanding of what has been
agreed, and to move things along. .
(4) On the critical issue of security, I don't think the Israelis any more trust NATO to stand firm. They will expect
an IDF presence in the Jordan Valley for some time. Palestinians recognize that there will be a transitional
phase. Question is how long.
(5) As you know, Abbas' position is crumbling. Based on my conversation with him when he was here recently, I
think he is genuinely committed to an agreement. He hopes that, if this fails, Bibi will seem to be
unreasonable. And in that event, I expect he will resign. His minimal requirement is the equivalent of 1967.
This is all tricky business, but I don't think we have a responsible choice not to make this effort. It is the highest form of
statesmanship for you to try.
I am leaving on Monday for some foreign travel but can be reached through my office -- Laura
Huber
Sandy"
6313,"Roger. We'll make the changes, clean it up, and sent last round to you tomorrow."
6314,Ok
6315,"Below are proposed pts and background for handling the WI issue with Davut tomorrow. I'm sending to specials to print
for you.
Points for FM Davutoglu on Wikileaks
. Spiegel Online previews the
Der Spiegel analysis (set for publication tomorrow) that ""if one were to believe the gloomy reports from the embassy in
Ankara, Turkey is on a slippery slope to volatile Islamism, spurred on by the narrow-minded government of Prime
Minister Recept Tayyip Erdogan, who is portrayed as being reliant on a group of incompetent advisors.""
Talking Points:
\"
6316,Yes - the scenesetter and the general cable on Turkey's foreign policy
6318,"Here is the latest draft, which incorporates your changes and suggestions, and has been through each of us (me, Jake,
and AMS) at least once. There may still be a few facts to be tweaked and we are looking for one more example from
WHA for the Mexico paragraph. I will also re-read it carefully later tonight and tomorrow morning to catch any typos,
weird grammar, or things that don't flow. I'm too close to it now and want to read it again when I'm fresh. But hopefully
this is close to final.
Lissa"
6319,"You may have gotten this sad news from Lauren or Tamera already, but if not, see the message below.
Begin forwarded message:"
6320,"+ caitlin
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, Se tember 5, 2010 4:41 PM
H; kdowd
Laurenjilo Klevorick, Caitlin B
Re: Update on PSA"
6322,I can't even begin to tell you....
6325,I hear they have great diving...
6326,"I will be out of the office on official travel through Tuesday, November 9th. If you need immediate assistance, please call
202-647-9572."
6327,Touche
6328,"Yes - will call later tonite or am.
Had b/fast vi/ Marty.
So will call re ME"
6329,"I do. Its actually my folder of call sheets, (which I'm updating right now), but I can make one for you if you like! I'm
working on them now anyway."
6330,"lauren, why dont you bring down when you are done thanks"
6331,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, November 28, 2010 10:54 PM
H; cheryl.mills
Re: Wikileaks
B6
Agree"
6332,"Tom and Larry doing fine in early meetings here in Beijing. Tom has highlighted critical role of S and ED. Larry somewhat
discursive and academic on global economic issues. China intent on a good Hu summit in DC likely scheduled for January
2011. Dai agrees to meet with S in third city in Fall -- will work on details. More later Kurt"
6333,Yep- ill have it in 5 mins for you. Almost done
6334,Fyi
6335,"I think it is a strong case and very clear now. I just want to read it again in the morning to make sure everything tracks
and flows and double check a few facts. Also I realized this afternoon that we weren't overt about the QDDR being the
first of many, but I think I took care of that in this draft. All in all, I feel good about it.
Sent from my iPhone. Apologies for any typos.
On Aug 29, 2010, at 4:47 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> Thx for all you work on this. Do you fell ok about it now?
>"
6336,"ok
>"
6337,"Hi. I'm very sorry, but I just saw this. Don't know how it escaped my attention. I will track it down tomorrow. I don't
know off hand. Hope you had a good Thanksgiving. Jen and kids and I were in Chicago. See you tomorrow."
6341,"090610.docx
September 6, 2010
For: Hillary"
6342,"MS — I asked Huma about the Jackie Newmeyer/October 20th e-mail.., she does not know what Jackie is referring to and
also says that we have ""cleared that day"" for you.
Also, I passed forward to Huma and Eric that you would like to know details regarding the November 17 Women's Law
Center honoring Melanne.
-Lauren"
6343,FYI
6350,"RELEASE IN PART
B6
I emailed Jeff yesterday and have not heard back. Will ping again this am.
On Mon, Nov 29, 2010 at 7:50 AM, H <HDR22@c1intonemai1.com> wrote:
Did you find out if he's going to China?"
6352,"Robert Pape is a top strategic thinker from U of Chicago who is best known for his empirical work showing a strong
correlation between suicide terrorism and occupation by foreign troops. In his new work he is proposing a grand strategy
of off-shore/on-shore balancing, where we keep nimble deployable military forces over the horizon and use"
6353,For your situational awareness.
6355,"MS --
Valmoro, Lona.) <ValmoroU@state.goy>
Tuesday, September 21, 2010 8:01 AM
H
Thank you!
I hope the craziness of UNGA is going well -- thank you again!
All the best, Lona"
6356,This is so discouraging.
6359,"MS,
Westerwelle has a call into you. He would like to discuss his recent trip to the Balkans. A call sheet is forthcoming — we
are due to receive it mid-day today.
Lauren"
6360,"The Indian foreign ministry has been pinging us to have a call between you and Krishna on the nuclear liability
legislation. Bill believes you should call Krishna today — because he will be in receive mode —
SCA is drafting that message with Bill's guidance. You could then call Menon tomorrow or Wednesday.
If you agree, we'll get the call sheet out to you soon."
6361,"I am currently out of the office through mid-December. For specific scheduling issues, please contact
Eric Woodard at WoodardEW@state.gov. For additional assistance, please reach out to our Special Assistants, Timmy
Davis and Laura Lucas, at 202-647-9572. Thank you!"
6362,"Pi now at 2:30pm on Thurs.
cdm"
6363,"Let me try this again.
Robert Pape is a top strategic thinker from U of Chicago who is best known for his empirical work showing a strong
correlation between suicide terrorism and occupation by foreign troops. In his new work he is proposing a grand strategy
of off-shore/on-shore balancing. Below is the elevator version, or at least an academic's version of the elevator version.
What is interesting is how closely it tracks with our emphasis on civilian power and the need for a smaller military due to
budget constraints. If you want more the attached one-page proposal outlines a 3-year series of steps to apply this
proposal to Afghanistan.
""An Alternative Security Strategy. Off-shore/on-shore balancing seeks to achieve America's core national security
objectives through a combination of over-the-horizon (""off-shore"") military power and in-region (""on-shore"") economic and
political power. Off-shore/on-shore balancing is an alternative to advancing U.S. security goals through the deployment of
large ground forces overseas, already problematic and likely to become even more so as economic challenges continue
and chronic resentment deepens. Off-shore/on-shore balancing relies on naval, air, and rapidly deployable ground forces
in combination with on-site economic and political support for local partners to secure America's interests in combating
terrorism and achieving other key national security goals, particularly in the Middle East and Asia.""
