Re: Sri Lanka
Working it now; will provide to media as soon as we have delivery confirmatio. Should be by early this afternoon. RI"
2671,"Thank you Madame Secretary the information you received from Jakarta is consistent with what we have now heard
from Indonesians. Scott and I just held an agency wide review of our collective Pacific wide efforts to date and where we
both need more information and where we are prepared to do more. Our team is doing a full accounting of every effort
to date and we will have this to you by mid afternoon. We are awaiting word from Luzon and I anticipate that we will
need to do much more there and in parts of Indonesia in the days ahead. We will be in touch with our interagency
colleagues throughout the day and will update you again accordingly. Thank you for your efforts and the readouts. I will
also do follow ups as you request. Best Kurt"
2672,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, September 1, 2009 4:09 PM
H
Re:"
2674,We'll set up a call so all can join -- what time? •
2675,Not from me - he has put in edits - tracking Jake down now to make sure nothing else from him
2676,We hadn't gathered people yet only cause jake and cdm hadn't said to move forward But checking in now
2677,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, September 1, 2009 4:21 PM
H
Re:"
2678,Confirmed that oscar is at house.
2679,We are making reservations
2680,"From your clips:
US Responds To Sri Lanka Protest Over Clinton Remark (AFP) Monday, October 5, 2009 AFP
WASHINGTON (AFP) - The United States, responding to protests from Sri Lanka over remarks by Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton, said it had no recent evidence of women being raped while in Sri Lankan government custody.
In a letter addressed to Sri Lanka's Minister of Foreign Affairs Rohitha Bogollagama, the State Department noted that the
US government and international human rights groups over the years had detailed ""numerous cases of rape and sexual
violence in Sri Lanka, particularly acts committed against women held in detention by the government.""
However, the letter signed by Melanne Verveer, ambassador at large for global women's issues at the State Department
said that ""in the most recent phase of the conflict, from 2006 to 2009 ... we have not received reports that rape and
sexual abuse were used as tools of war, as they clearly have in other conflict area around the world.""
""We hope that this clarification puts the issue in its proper context,"" the letter said, adding that Washington remains
concerned about extrajudicial killings, disappearances and detainee abuse in Sri Lanka.
""Secretary Clinton believes that Sri Lanka must focus to the future and move forward on the promotion of peace and the
protection of human rights,"" the letter said.
Sri Lanka lodged its protest with the US embassy in Colombo over the remarks made by Clinton last month to the United
Nations Security Council.
""We've seen rape used as a tactic of war before in Bosnia, Burma and Sri Lanka and elsewhere,"" the US secretary of state
had said during a resolution calling for an end to sexual violence in armed conflict, according to published reports of
Clinton's remarks.
Her comments sparked an outcry across Sri Lanka, where government forces in May crushed Tamil Tiger rebels after
decades of fighting.
Colombo faced condemnation for its handling of the final stages of the war against Tiger rebels and managed to stave
off a Security Council resolution calling for war crimes investigations thanks to the vetoes of China and Russia.
The United Nations has said that over 7,000 civilians perished in the first four months of intense fighting this year.
Sri Lanka is now facing international pressure to free 250,000 ethnic Tamil civilians who managed to escape the fighting
but are now held in internment camps while they are screened to see whether they were rebels.
B6"
2681,"briefed a group of wonks at Brookings tonite. Superbly impressive & persuasive. Low-key mastery & confidence.
Congrats on having her on your team & leading these negs."
2682,"The only thing anyone yelled at you was ""WE LOVE YOU HILLARY"""
2683,Message from scott gration
2684,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Friday, August 21, 2009 6:51 PM
H
Fw: Tom Harkin
I never got a call sheet. See traffic below which has some info on what she's interested in doing."
2685,"Just hearing oas conf starts sunday.
Would u be willing to talk to espinosa tomorrow?
17fi"
2686,He thinks there is limited hope for this and had an alternative strategy. Will discuss
2687,"Also, steinmeier called for you. We are getting call sheet."
2688,Ok we will follow up.
2689,Yes I have a copy.
2690,"Sounds good -- and I apologize about all of the private meetings today, I should have done a separate schedule for you.
2:30pm is Ken Feinberg.
4pm is Lou D'Allesandro dropping by for a quick hello.
6pm is General Keane and he knows we will get back to him about location. 6pm is the earliest he can do today."
2691,"PVerveer
Tuesday, September 1, 2009 11:01 PM
H
reinesp@state.gov; abedinh@state.gov
Fwd: From Lisa Ling"
2692,"Strobe Talbott
Friday, August 21, 2009 7:06 PM
H
RE: Brooke Memorial Fellowship in India
Thanks, Hillary. The notification was emphatically NOT a solicitation. Besides, you've already contributed such a vast
amount-to her life, and to the celebration of it.
Happy to chat any time. I'm around all weekend. You might shoot me an email (which I'll get by BlackBerry even if I'm
not at my workbench) and let me know when you want to call, or want me to call you, or whatever.
S."
2693,Will do.
2694,"John podesta just returned from spending time with bachelet in chile. Would like to talk to you about his trip.
cell B6
128"
2695,"Espinosa confirmed for 10am
170"
2696,"H RC:
FYI. This is my point.
cdm"
2697,Fyi
2698,"Fyi - see b/I
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, August 22, 2009 4:41 AM
H
Fw: AMCIT suspected of abuse of minors in Liberia"
2699,fyi
2700,See below my email
2701,"sbwhoeop
Tuesday, October 6, 2009 2:11 PM
H
Note from Joe Wilson... Sid
Hillary: I'm passing on a note below from Joe Wilson. Sid
Dear Madame Secretary,
It was great to see you, albeit briefly, at the US —Africa business summit. Your speech spoke to the entire
audience as I'm sure you felt from the response. I also appreciate your offer to meet with me the next time we
are both in Washington and would like to take you up on it.
I am now working with a serious American engineering and construction company, Symbion Power, that has
been hugely successful in Iraq and Afghanistan (on fixed cost contracts). It specializes in power plants,
substations and transmission towers and lines. It made its name in Iraq constructing transmission towers and
pulling lines across al Anbar province at the height of the war there. Its business model is to partner with local
companies and to train local employees to do the construction, maintenance and repair, and to provide the
security. In Iraq and Afghanistan they established training centers and graduated over 3000 certified
linemen. They partner with an American Lineman College in Idaho to provide the ed ucation and
certification. We think the model is well adapted to Africa and have already begun work on a training center in
Tanzania, where we will be bidding on all of the upcoming MCC financed power generation and distribution
projects. I have asked Sid to pass a memory stick with a four minute video that explains what Symbion does
and how it does it.
I tell you all this, not to tout Symbion (about which I am very enthusiastic) but let you know that we are doing
much of what you have been advocating in your public comments about human capacity development. The fact
that we have been successful on fixed cost contracts also speaks to your criticism of American companies that
have been milking the government with their cost plus contracts for the last nine years. Our goal is to
demonstrate that an emphasis on developing local talent is not just the right thing to do but is also good
business.
I look forward to seeing you the next time I am in Washington. I know how precious your time is, and very
much appreciate your generosity.
With warm regards and best wishes.
Joe"
2702,She has been confirmed for 10am.
2703,More
2704,FYI
2706,"Thanks, Also, Sergei Kislyak told me last evening that the change in administrations here + the missile defense decision
made it much easier for Russia to be helpful on Iran last week. Re connecting, I'm off this evening to Rhodes, Athens,
Paris, Oslo, & Istanbul, but I can be reached via my office as I bounce around. Cheers, S."
2707,Fyi
2708,FYI B6
2709,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, August 22, 2009 9:59 AM
H
Fw: (WSJ)- German government awaits outcome of GM board of directors meeting"
2710,I don't see why we couldn't -- Huma?
2711,Fyi
2712,It actually happened yesterday and we found out after the fact. Todd said he would send you a read out.
2714,"Hillary: FYI: I found this one of the most sensible and informed brief articles on Afghanistan. Patrick Cockburn, of
the London Independent, is one of the best informed on-the-ground journalists. He was almost always correct on
Iraq. Sid
Patrick Cockburn: To say this war must be won
in a year is nonsense
http://www.independent co.uk/opinion/commentators/patrick-cockbum-to-say-this-war-must-be-won-
in-a-year-is-nonsense-1799296.html
Thursday, 8 October 2009
SPONSORED LINKS:
Eight years ago I was standing on a hill 50 miles north of Kabul watching the flashes in the night sky
as the US air strikes started again st the Taliban front line. There were a few ineffective puffs of fire
from Taliban anti-aircraft guns which could do nothing against the bombs and missiles raining down
on them.
It was a strange war to cover, not least because so little real fighting took place. The reputation of the
Afghan fighting man is partly based on agilely joining the winning side at the right moment. In the
meantime they don't fight too hard for anybody and try to avoid getting killed.
The US and British press mostly reported the war of 2001 as a real military conflict and rather missed
the point that the Taliban had just gone home. I remember visiting the former headquarters of a
Taliban armoured brigade in the city of Ghazni south west of Kabul. The tanks and armoured vehicles
had all been smashed to pieces by American bombs, but when I asked local people how many men
the Taliban had lost, I was told ""none at all. They could see what was going to happen so they just
ran away.""
Just as the US military victory of 2001 was overstated, so eight years later is the sense of military
crisis which is being busily stoked by Gen Stanley A McChrystal, the top US and NATO commander
in Afghanistan. In Washington military officials are quoted as saying that the war will be won or lost in
the next twelve months.
This is nonsense. The Taliban have been able to advance so rapidly in the last three years because
they have Pakistani backing and because of the spectacular political and military weakness of
President Hamid Karzai's government. But the Taliban draw all their strength from the Pashtun
community, which makes up 42 per cent of the Afghan population. They will have great difficulty
advancing into areas occupied by the other 58 per cent of the population where there is a Tajik,
Hazara or Uzbek majority.
Squads of six or eight Taliban on motorcycles might be harassing the roads around Kabul, but there
is no need to treat them as if they were North Vietnamese divisions at the gates of Saigon in 1975.
The strength of the Taliban is that not that they can take and hold territory, but that they can inflict
quite small military losses on the US which are politically unacceptable back home. They can do this
through roadside bombs, something the US army speaks as i f it were a new device, though it was
being used against the British army in Ireland in 1921. If the Americans and British try to hold territory
supposedly cleared of Taliban with penny packets of troops then these are vulnerable to being
suddenly targeted by the other side.
It is to prevent this happening that Gen McChrystal has asked for an extra 40,000 soldiers. But
Afghans tell me that more foreign troops will simply mean more violence and dead Afghans as more
of the country becomes a battlefield. It is absurd to imagine that the world's most heavily equipped
military force is not going to use its weapons when it comes under attack. Polls also show that
Taliban support is at its height in just those areas where Afghan civilians have been killed by
American shells and bombs.
So what should Obama do? First of all he has time. He is not going to win or lose the war in the next
year. Like it or not he is stuck with Mr Karzai and he should get used to the idea. It is reasonable to
suggest helping to produce a larger Afghan army and police force but this cannot be done overnight.
Most military recruits are there for the money and are too malnourished even to wear American flack
jackets. Speeding up security training f or Afghan police meant over the summer that terrified men,
often on heroin, were being sent to man dangerous and isolated police posts with just three weeks
training. Many of them did not come back.
One way Obama could strengthen the Afghan army and police is to make sure their men are paid
properly. In Kabul many facilities are being guarded by policemen earning $70 a month, which is not
enough to live on unless supplemented with bribes. This contrasts with $250,000 a year paid to
foreign consultants who lurk inside heavily defended compounds. Paying the Iraqi army properly
really did make a difference in Baghdad and might do the same in Afghanistan where 40 per cent of
men are unemployed. A difference is that Iraqi oil revenues last year were $62 billion while the
Afghan government is dependent on foreign aid.
The US and its allies will have to pay. It is carefully thought out measures like this that Obama should
be considering and not the panicky dispatch of US Special Forces or tens of thousand of more troops."
2715,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, August 22, 2009 12:01 PM
H
Fw: (Reuters) Germany's Steinmeier proposes Afghan pull-out talks"
2716,"Will check
I know melanne moved forward after she discussed with you. Will see if people can change to dinner."
2717,Fine with me -- I'll give him a call - he won't have an opinion on who should be his deputy though.
2718,1/7
2720,"Trying to see if I can.
cdm"
2721,"10:00 am DEPART OTR Residence
En route LaGuardia Airport
[drive time: 2 hours, 40 minutes]
12:40 pm ARRIVE LaGuardia Airport
1:00 pm DEPART LaGuardia Airport via US Airways Shuttle #2175
En route Washington National Airport
2:06 pm ARRIVE Washington National Airport
2:15 pm DEPART Washington National Airport
En route State Department
2:30 pm ARRIVE State Department
2:30 pm PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
2:45 pm Secretary's Office
2:45 pm MEETING w/AMBASSADOR BOB BRADTKE AND A/S PHIL GORDON
3:00 pm Secretary's Office
3:00 pm OFFICE TIME
3:30 pm Secretary's Office
3:30 pm FAREWELL CALL w/CLINT WILLIAMSON (S/VVCI)
3:40 pm Secretary's Office *Official photo preceding.
3:45 pm MEETING w/LISSA MUSCATINE
4:15 pm Secretary's Office
4:30 pm MEETING w/NSC ADVISOR GENERAL JAMES JONES
5:30 pm Secretary's Office
5:30 pm MEETING w/ANNE MARIE SLAUGHTER
6:15 pm Secretary's Office
6:30 pm DEPART State Department
En route Private Residence
6:40 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###
30
/1"
2722,"Just spoke with her — says things are pretty grim. Abbas is in very precarious shape because of a combination of
Goldstone (and them handling it badly), the Hamas prisoner release, and Egypt ramming reconciliation with problematic
terms. Israelis recognize in principle that he needs help, but they won't budge on anything."
2723,"Will do on shuttle. Jones' office called me about an hour ago and said they are still looking for time on Thursday
afternoon -- will follow up again shortly."
2724,"Ten is fine. Try first. . If no answer n extremis
Just came from All well"
2725,"I haven't heard anything from Landrieu's office, will follow up.
Will do on Kouchner."
2726,"Apparently, they filled the PC time ""immediately"" -- Jones lands at 1:00pm so will have an update shortly thereafter."
2727,"Strobe talbott says he's expecting a call from you 10am. He gave all his numbers to ops if u want to call thru them.
145"
2728,"Meeting now confirmed for Thursday at 4:30pm in your office.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
202-647-9071 (direct)
35"
2729,"Sure, just call"
2730,"I spoke to Ann and she sd that you always have the Trustee box to use in each House.
She cannot hold a box for The Secretary of State use only not - bt can further discussions with KC on this
She advises that we need to give advance notice -
There are 4 seat in the Eisenhower that are complimentary and then 4 that would need to be purchased for nominal fee
(seems like a really silly policy) The same for Opera and in the Symphony there are 12 all complimentary. I think if we
begin to use the box on a regular basis we can work with them on the cost issues.
This could be a lovely way to serve many special guests.
Let me know if you want to begin a process of reviewing the KC calendar and start a list of recommendations to invite.
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
2731,"tickets shouldnt be a problem, just put request in.
its about 45 min from chappaqua and starts at 8pm."
2732,"Also - Ann is sending the number of people you have to include for the KC Honors dinner at the State Dept. She
confirmed they pay for the evening but was reluctant to commit to decorations - she will check.
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
2733,FYI traffic from bottom up
2734,"Cc: Sullivan, Jacob J
Madam Secretary,
Attached and below please find a brief backgrounder on the United States Institute of Peace. Please let me know if you
would like any further information.
Thanks,
Mike
United States Institute of Peace: Background
Proposals for the creation of a government ""peace"" agency stretch as far back as a proposal in 1792 to create a ""Peace
Office"" on par with the War Department. Between 1935 and 1976 over 140 bills were introduced in Congress to
establish peace-related agencies, departments, bureaus, and committees of Congress. In 1979 Congress established the
Commission on Proposals for the National Academy of Peace and Conflict Resolution. In 1981, the Commission — known
as the Matsunaga Commission for its head, Senator Spark Matsunaga — recommended the creation of a national peace
academy. In 1984, President Reagan signed the United States Institute of Peace Act and the first meeting of USIP's Board
of Directors took place in 1986.
The USIP Act established ""an independent, nonprofit, national institute to serve the people and the Government
through the widest possible range of education and trainings, basic and applied research opportunities, and peace
information services on the means to promote international peace and the resolution of conflicts among the nations and
peoples of the world without recourse to violence.""
USIP is an independent agency, funded by Congress, which serves as an intersection between those involved in policy
research, fieldwork, and practitioners. More than 70 USIP policy experts conduct research on a wide variety of country-
specific and cross-cutting functional issues. Some examples of USIP activities include:
® Working in countries such as Iraq, Sudan, Nigeria, Uganda, Pakistan, and Afghanistan to mediate and facilitate
dialogue among parties in conflict, promote the rule of law, strengthen civil society and education systems, and
educating the public through events, films, and other outreach.
O USIP has given out $58 million in grants for over 1,700 peacebuilding projects in 76 countries.
® USIP hosts standing working groups of experts and practitioners on a variety of issues, including Sudan, Syria,
Korea, Iran, Iraq, and Haiti.
® USIP has facilitated a number of task forces, including the Iraq Study Group and the recent Congressional
Commission on the Strategic Posture of the United States, chaired by William Perry.
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709"
2736,FYI
2738,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, October 19, 2009 6:27 PM
H
FW: Resume and Other Matters
FYI"
2740,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, August 23, 2009 9:17 AM
H
Fw: South Korea's Lee meets North Korean delegation (AP)"
2741,RudmanM@state.gov
2742,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, October 10, 2009 6:13 AM
H 1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
S/E Mitchell spoke to EGIS Chief Omar Solimon on October 5, 2009.
10/10/2024"
2743,"Sorry for the delay. Yes, I planned on being here all week."
2746,fyi
2747,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, October 20, 2009 7:35 AM
H
RE: Resume and Other Matters B6
worked for John P during our administration - you'd recall him if you saw him"
2748,Hrc is going to be in dc tomorrow. Taking the 2pm shuttle.
2749,"e-mailing you her numbers in case you want to save them to your contacts. I also have them in mine, updated them in
your rolodex, and sent these to Huma:
Lauren Jiloty
Special Assistant to
Secretary Hillary Rodham Clinton
JilotyLC@state.gov
49"
2750,"As it turns out, Susan Rice needs to stay up in NY tonight and has asked if she can speak with you on a secure phone line
tomorrow at 9:30am. Can I go ahead and set that up?
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
(202) 647-9071
53"
2751,"Glamour has provided an excellent update and the good news is that Nujood is in private school and attending regularly.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerM5@state.gov"
2752,"Alonzo says they are very full with the holiday weekend. He cannot guarantee first in either the 3pm or 4pm.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
(202) 647-9071"
2753,"Yes it is at variance, perhaps not surprising. However, post is also involved so we will be getting another assessment."
2754,"FYI — b/1 in process
Cheryl Mills
Thursday, September 3, 2009 11:32 PM
H
FW:
B6
B6"
2755,Fyi
2756,"suicide
Importance: High
FYI"
2757,FYI
2758,"See below for discussion.
I think we are going to need to be very specific about limiting more of her activities in the building than she suggests b/c
as is, she is in many matters here too that are very consuming.
cdm"
2759,"Capricia Marshall <capriciamarshall
Tuesday, October 20, 2009 8:12 AM
Huma Abedin; H
Fwd. --résumé
pdf
This is who is interested in attending Georgetown next year. She is clearly a
good student. She is hoping for your support.
Forwarded message"
2760,Yes - and it is.
2761,"Clinton Is?-over all it reflects your amazing strength of""Purpose""...keep on Sis and love
I think it was in your clips over the weekend but I will send it to your right now"
2762,"PIR <preines
Monday, August 24, 2009 7:59 AM
H
Re: just read"
2763,"It's quite possibly the best thing written about you as SecState. We're getting it around to friends & family, along with
People op-ed and NYT Mag q&a - was a great weekend in terms of positive press.
It's 3 a.m. Do You Know Where Hillary Clinton Is?
By David Rothkopf
Washington Post
Sunday, August 23, 2009
When it comes to Hillary Rodham Clinton, we're missing the forest for the pantsuits.
Clinton is not the first celebrity to become the nation's top diplomat -- that honor goes to her most distant predecessor,
Thomas Jefferson, who by the time he took office was one of the most famous and gossiped-about men in America --
but she may be the biggest. And during her first seven months in office, the former first lady, erstwhile presidential
candidate and eternal lightning rod has drawn more attention for her moods, looks, outtakes and (of course)
relationship with her husband than for, well, her work revamping the nation's foreign policy.
Even venerable publications -- such as one to which I regularly contribute, Foreign Policy -- have woven into their all-
Hillary-all-the-time coverage odd discussions of Clinton's handbag and scarf choices. Daily Beast editor Tina Brown, while
depicting herself as a Clinton supporter, has been scathing and small-minded in discussing such things as Clinton's
weight and hair, while her ""defense"" of Hillary in her essay ""Obama's Other Wife"" was as sexist as the title suggests.
Indeed, sexism has followed Clinton from the campaign trail to Foggy Bottom, as seen most recently in the posturing
outrage surrounding the exchange in Congo when Clinton reacted with understandable frustration to the now-infamous
question regarding her husband's views. Major media outlets have joined the gossipfest, whether the New York Times,
which covered Clinton's first big policy speech by discussing whether she was in or out with the White House, or The
Washington Post, where a couple of reporters mused about whether a brew called Mad Bitch would be the beer of
choice for the secretary of state.
Amid all the distractions, what is Clinton actually doing? Only overseeing what may be the most profound changes in
U.S. foreign policy in two decades -- a transformation that may render the presidencies of Bill Clinton and George W.
Bush mere side notes in a long transition to a meaningful post-Cold War worldview.
The secretary has quietly begun rethinking the very nature of diplomacy and translating that vision into a revitalized
State Department, one that approaches U.S. allies and rivals in ways that challenge long-held traditions. And despite the
pessimists who invoked the ""team of rivals"" cliche to predict that President Obama and Clinton would not get along,
Hillary has defined a role for herself in the Obamaverse: often bad cop to his good cop, spine stiffener when it comes to
tough adversaries and nurturer of new strategies. Recognizing that the 3 a.m. phone calls are going to the White House,
she is instead tackling the tough questions that, since the end of the Cold War, have kept America's leaders awake all
night.
In these early days of the new administration, it has been easy to focus on what Clinton has not achieved or on ways in
which her power has been supposedly constrained. Indeed, some of her efforts have been frustrated by difficult
personnel approvals or disputes with the White House about who should get what jobs. But this is the way of all
administrations. More unusual has been the avidity with which the new president has seized the reins of foreign policy --
more assertively than either George W. Bush or Bill Clinton before him. Obama's centrality amplifies the importance of
his closest White House staffers, while his penchant for appointing special envoys such as Richard Holbrooke (on
Afghanistan and Pakistan) and George Mitchell (on the Middle East) has been interpreted by some as limiting Clinton's
role.
Given the challenges involved, it was perhaps natural that the White House would have a bigger day-to-day hand in
some of the nation's most urgent foreign policy issues. But with Obama, national security adviser Jim Jones, Vice
President Joe Biden and Secretary of Defense Robert Gates absorbed by Iraq, Afghanistan and other inherited problems
of the recent past, Clinton's State Department can take on a bigger role in tackling the problems of the future -- in
particular, how America will lead the world in the century ahead. This approach is both necessary and canny: It
recognizes that U.S. policy must change to fulfill Obama's vision and that many high-profile issues such as those of the
Middle East have often swamped the careers and aspirations of secretaries of state past.
Which nations will be our key partners? What do you do when many vital partners -- China, for example, and Russia --
are rivals as well? How must America's alliances change as NATO is stretched to the limit? How do we engage with rogue
states and old enemies in ways that do not strengthen them and preserve our prerogative to challenge threats? How do
we move beyond the diplomacy of men in striped pants speaking only for governments and embrace potent nonstate
players and once-disenfranchised peoples?
In searching for answers, Clinton is leaving behind old doctrines and labels. She outlined her new thinking in a recent
speech at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, where she revealed stark differences between the new
administration's worldview and those of its predecessors: The recurring themes include ""partnership"" and
""engagement"" and ""common interests."" Clearly, Madeleine Albright's ""indispensable nation"" has recognized the
indispensability of collaborating with others.
Who those ""others"" are is the area in which change has been greatest and most rapid. ""We will put,"" Clinton said,
""special emphasis on encouraging major and emerging global powers -- China, India, Russia and Brazil, as well as Turkey,
Indonesia and South Africa -- to be full partners in tackling the global agenda."" This is the death knell for the G-8 as the
head table of the global community; the administration has an effort underway to determine whether the successor to
the G-8 will be the G-20, or perhaps some other grouping. Though the move away from the G-8 began in the waning
days of the Bush era, that administration viewed the world through a different lens, a perception that evolved from a
traditional great-power view to a pre-Galilean notion that everything revolved around the world's sole superpower.
Obama and Clinton have both made engaging with emerging powers a priority. Obama visited Russia earlier this year
and will host Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in his first state dinner in November. Clinton has made trips to
China and India, and she would have been with Obama in Russia had she not injured her elbow. Both have visited Africa
and the Middle East, reaching out to women and the Islamic world.
On many critical agenda items -- from a rollback of nuclear weapons to the climate or trade talks -- such emerging
powers will be essential to achieving U.S. goals. As a result, we've seen a new American willingness to play down old
differences, whether with Russia on a missile shield or, as Clinton showed on her China trip, with Beijing on human
rights.
At the center of Clinton's brain trust is Anne-Marie Slaughter, the former dean of Princeton's Woodrow Wilson School of
Public and International Affairs. Now head of policy planning at the State Department, Slaughter elaborated on the ideas
in Clinton's speech. ""We envision getting not just a new group of states around a table, but also building networks,
coalitions and partnerships of states and nonstate actors to tackle specific problems,"" she told me.
""To do that,"" Slaughter continued, ""our diplomats are going to need to have skills that are closer to community
organizing than traditional reporting and analysis. New connecting technologies will be vital tools in this kind of
diplomacy.""
A new team has been brought in to make these changes real. Clinton recruited Alec Ross, one of the leaders of Obama's
technology policy team, to the seventh floor of the State Department as her senior adviser for innovation. His mission is
to harness new information tools to advance U.S. interests -- a task made easier as the Internet and mobile networks
have played starring roles in recent incidents, from Iran to the Uighur uprising in western China to Moldova. Whether
through a telecommunications program in Congo to protect women from violence or text messaging to raise money for
Pakistani refugees in the Swat Valley, technology has been deployed to reach new audiences.
Of course, you need more than new ideas to revitalize the State Department; you need resources, too. The secretary has
brought in former Bill Clinton-era budget chief Jack Lew to help her claw back money for statecraft that many in Foggy
Bottom feel has been sucked off toward the Pentagon. She has also created special positions to back new priorities, such
as Melanne Verveer as ambassador at large for women's issues, Elizabeth Bagley to handle public-private outreach
worldwide and Todd Stern as the chief negotiator on climate.
Even just a few months in, it's clear that these appointments are far from window dressing. Lew, Slaughter and the
acting head of the U.S. Agency for International Development are leading an effort to rethink foreign aid with the new
Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review, an initiative modeled on the Pentagon's strategic assessments and
designed to review State's priorities. Stern has conducted high-level discussions on climate change around the world,
notably with China. Clinton made women's issues a centerpiece of her recent 11-day trip to Africa, where she stressed
that ""the social, political and economic marginalization of women across Africa has left a void in this continent that
undermines progress and prosperity.""
Clinton has also signaled the importance of private-sector experience by naming former Goldman Sachs International
vice chairman Robert Hormats, a respected veteran of four administrations, to handle economic issues at the State
Department, as well as Judith McHale, former chief executive of Discovery Communications, to run public diplomacy. In
the same vein, she has opened up Cuba to American telecommunications companies and reached out to India's private
sector on energy cooperation -- showing that this administration will seek to advance national interests by tapping the
self-interests of the business community. As with any new administration, there have been inevitable problems. The old
campaign teams -- Clinton's and Obama's -- still eye each other warily, but this feeling is gradually fading. And by most
accounts, the administration's national security team has come together successfully, with Clinton developing strong
relationships with national security adviser Jones and Defense Secretary Gates. Her policy deputy, Jim Steinberg, has
renewed an old collaboration with deputy national security adviser Tom Donilon; the two of them, working with Obama
campaign foreign policy advisers Denis McDonough and Mark Lippert, have formed what one State Department
seventh-floor dweller called ""a powerful quartet at the heart of real interagency policymaking."" Henry Kissinger may
have overstated matters when he said this is the best White House-State relationship in recent memory, but it's not bad,
while the State-Pentagon relationship is in its best shape in decades.
At the heart of things, though, is the relationship between Clinton and Obama. For all the administration's talk of
international partnerships, that may be the most critical partnership of all.
So far, according to multiple high-level officials at State and the White House, the two seem aligned in their views. In
addition, they are gradually defining complementary roles. Obama has assumed the role of principal spokesperson on
foreign policy, as international audiences welcome his new and improved American brand. Clinton thus far has echoed
his points but has also delivered tougher ones. Whether on a missile shield against Iran or North Korean saber-rattling,
the continued imprisonment of Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma or rape and corruption in Congo, the secretary of state has
spoken bluntly on the world stage -- even if it triggered snide comments from North Korea.
It is still early, and a president's foreign policy legacy is often defined less by big principles than by how one reacts to the
unexpected, whether missiles in Cuba or terrorism in New York. Promising ideas fail because of limited attention or
reluctant bureaucracies, and some rhetoric eventually rings hollow, as the self-congratulatory ""smart power"" already
does to me.
Nevertheless, there is evidence that, seven months into the job, Obama's unlikely secretary of state is supporting and
augmenting his agenda effectively. Not as Obama's ""other wife,"" not as Bill Clinton's wife, not even as a celebrity or as a
former presidential candidate -- but in a new role of her own making.
David Rothkopf is a visiting scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and the author of ""Superclass:
The Global Power Elite and the World They Are Making"" and ""Running the World: The Inside Story of the NSC and the
Architects of American Power."" He will be online to chat with readers Monday at 11 a.m. Submit your questions and
comments before or during the discussion."
2764,TO HOLD RUN-OFF
2765,"Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Friday, September 04, 2009 2:55 PM
H
Swanee
We were judging the candidates for the Swanee Hunt Award which goes annually to a FS0 and a FSN judged superior
for integrating women's issues into their work. T hey are nominated by ambassadors at posts or AS's here.
I called her because we had a tie for the FSO's and I wanted to see if she'd provide a second monetary award so we
wouldn't have to divide the $5k. She agreed and then told me
State will fly in the awardees and the Secry usually gives out the award. Swanee is hoping that she'll be able to come and
be there for the brief ceremony.
I thought you'd want to know.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov
72"
2767,"Also, if we move the female heads of state lunch to a dinner, we lose almost all of the heads of state and several fms. Do
u want to keep as a lunch? Or move to a dinner and make it women foreign ministers?
Oscar says fax machine is down but he has clips for today and weekend he should have printed."
2768,"Brazilian fm asking to talk to you this afternoon about honduras. He prefers later in afternoon. We are getting a call
sheet for you."
2769,Tom Harkin asking to talk to you. Called directly. Didn't leave subject.
2770,"Fyi
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, September 05, 2009 7:37 AM
H
Fw: Possible Rieser Call on Foreign Ops Bill"
2771,FYI
2772,Fyi
2773,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, September 05, 2009 8:20 AM
H
Fw:
Remind me to discuss with you how I want to play this out.
Cdm"
2774,I have not been able to reach oscar this am. We are supposed to send the pdb at 11. Can u receive it?
2775,"Will call you around 530
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, September 05, 2009 11:48 AM
H
Re:"
2776,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, August 24, 2009 12:22 PM
Abedin, Huma
H
FW: Call Request: Senator Harkin for S - CDM PREVIEW ON WHAT HE MAY BE
CALLING ABOUT.
Tom
He and I are meeting about staffing this week when he is in town."
2777,"Pdb coming now
And talking points for potential call this weekend with shimon peres. I believe mitchell discussed with you"
2778,"ABOUT.
Hrc also has background from last week. But this looks like an update."
2780,Per our discussion
2781,"sbwhoeop
Monday, August 24, 2009 12:37 PM
H
one more thing
Forget to mention that Max's book, ""Republican Gomorrah,"" is coming out Sept 1. We gave Bill our
copy on the Vineyard. Have you seen it? Carville has started readin gand is blown away. Where
should Max send you a copy so you get it? Sid"
2782,do that this week.
2783,I have a cell that has changed. Tracking down new one
2784,fyi
2786,"Rahms assistant is asking for your email address. U want me to give him?
RS"
2787,"Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.gov>
Saturday, September 05, 2009 3:54 PM
Huma Abedin; H
Re: Terry Murray
I have a home number"
2788,Do you want him to have your email?
2789,K - will give to him directly
2790,See section on what opponents might say
2792,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, August 25, 2009 5:09 AM
H
Fw: REVISED Call Sheet S UNSYG UNGA
Call Sheet S UNSYG UNGA.docx
See WI - huma will print and provide call sheet"
2793,"Cheryl Mills <cheryl.mills( B6
Sunday, September 6, 2009 9:09 AM
H
'Sullivan, Jacob J'
FW: Informal Note on S and CTBT Article XIV Conference Participation
0904 Informal Note to S Staff on Article XIV Conference.docx
Hillary:
Below and attached is a note on CTBT Conference. After reviewing, see if you think it makes sense for you to
attend. We do and have vetted the idea with others. Of note is that this would be on 24 Sept after the President
has chaired the Non-Proliferation Security Council Meeting so it will be amplifying his remarks. We also will
have to think through, if you do this, what the Hill angle is but we think there is a good case to be made for it so
we will want to discuss with you this week.
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
INFORMAL NOTE FOR THE SECRETARY'S STAFF
FROM: T Front Office
SUBJECT: The Secretary's Participation in the CTBTO Article XIV Conference
Purpose of the CTBTO Article XIV Conference
B5
The Secretary's Message
1.4(
1.4(
B1
B5
Conclusion"
2795,"The facts will be right. Meanwhile, we're working to make it more of a semiautomatic."
2796,"Have kidlets beside me so will call later
Cdm"
2797,Anything on your call with him you want me to followup on?
2799,"8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am PRE-BRIEF FOR WEEKLY POTUS MEETING
9:30 am Secretary's Office
9:30 am BI-WEEKLY MEETING w/MANAGEMENT TEAM
10:00 am Deputy Secretary's Conference Room
10:00 am MEETING w/GEORGE MITCHELL
10:40 am Secretary's Office
10:45 am DEPART State Department *En route Renaissance Mayflower Hotel
10:55 am ARRIVE Renaissance Mayflower Hotel
11:00 am SPEECH ON NON-PROLIFERATION HOSTED BY THE
12:15 pm U.S. INSTITUTE FOR PEACE East Room, Renaissance Mayflower Hotel
12:20 pm DEPART Renaissance Mayflower Hotel *En route State Department
12:30 pm ARRIVE State Department
12:30 pm OFFICE TIME
1:15 pm (t) Secretary's Office
1:15 pm (t) PHONE CALL w/SOUTH AFRICAN FM NKOANA-MASHABANE
1:30 pm (t) Secretary's Office
1:45 pm DROP-BY LUNCHEON HOSTED BY A/S CAMPBELL
2:00 pm Webster Room, 8th Floor
2:15pm PHONE CALL w/ISRAELI FM AVIGDOR LIEBERMAN
2:30pm Secretary's Office
2:30 pm OFFICE TIME
3:00 pm Secretary's Office
3:00 pm MEETING NY/WILLIAM HAGUE, MEMBER OF BRITISH PARLIMENT
3:30 pm AND SHADOW FOREIGN SECRETARY Secretary's Office
3:30 pm OFFICE TIME
4:00 pm Secretary's Office
4:00 pm SWEARING-IN CEREMONY FOR OES ASSISTANT SECRETARY
4:20 pm ICERRI-ANN JONES Benjamin Franklin Room, 8th Floor
4:45 pm BUREAU BRIEFING ON COUNTER TERRORISM
5:45 pm Secretary's Conference Room
6:00 pm DEPART State Department *En route Private Residence
6:10 pm ARRIVE Private Residence ###"
2800,"PIR <preine!
Wednesday, October 21, 2009 7:05 PM
H
'Burns.stride
Re: Jim Wallis Interview Request...
Will do
Burns, will email you separately"
2801,"Fyi - the 730am michelleti call hasn't been confirmed yet. We offered the time but haven't heard back. Hopefully we will
know in the morning before 7am."
2802,You can ignore earlier email. Micheletti just confirmed.
2803,fyi
2804,"sbwhoeop
Thursday, October 22, 2009 12:02 AM
H
fyi: Hague report and DeMint... Sid
H: Here's the Guardian account of Hague's post-meeting press briefing. And below that the article on DeMint. S
William Hague addresses US fears over Tories'
EU allies
•Hillary Clinton 'told antisemitism allegations are a smear'
•Shadow foreign secretary opposes Tony Blair as EU leader
• Ewen MacAskill in Washington and Nicholas Watt
• quardian.co.uk, Thursday 22 October 2009 00.33 BST
William Hague, the shadow foreign secretary, yesterday defended the Conservatives' alliance with far-right parties in
Europe during a meeting in Washington with the US secretary of state, Hillary Clinton.
Hague sought to reassure Clinton about the Conservatives' partners, some of whose members have taken part in
commemoration services for the Waffen-SS in Latvia and questioned the need to apologise for an anti-Jewish pogrom in
Poland.
The shadow foreign secretary, who said he had an excellent meeting with Clinton, told her the accusations were part of a
smear campaign by the Guardian and others.
The row has overshadowed Hague's visit to Washington intended as part of the Conservative preparations for taking
power.
Speaking to the media afterwards, Hague said the behaviour of Michal Kaminski, of Poland's Law and Justice party, was
not consistent with anyone who was antisemitic. As for the Latvian party in the Conservatives' European alliance, Hague
said: ""This is a respectable party in Latvia ... To suggest it is antisemitic or neo-Nazi is ludicrous.""
Jewish groups in the US and in Europe have expressed anger over the Tory links.
The state department was careful not be drawn into the issue, not wanting to be accused of interference in UK politics or
issues relating to the European parliament. A spokesman said: ""I can say that the two had a good, wide-ranging
discussion on a broad range of issues, but can't get into details or substance of that discussion.""
Hague tried to persuade Clinton that the Conservatives' Euroscepticism would not necessarily mean Britain would play a
lesser role in European affairs. The US favours the EU acting in unison over Iran and other issues.
Hague said he had raised the allegations of antisemitism with Clinton at the end of a 40-minute discussion on Iran, the
Balkans, the Middle East, Northern Ireland, Afghanistan and climate change.
""No one has raised with me all day the other issue, of the parties in our grouping, but I raised that with secretary of state
Clinton because of press reports in your newspaper [the Guardian] and others in case she had seen those,"" Hague said.
""I have assured her they are mainstream parties of the centre-right ... The Conservative party rejects what it regards as a
smear campaign against some of its members.""
He noted that Kaminski made his first speech in the European Parliament highlighting the problem of anti-semitism in
Europe and had just completed a successful visit to Israel. ""These are not the habits of someone who is anti-semitic,""
Hague said.
As for the Latvians, of the six governing parties, ""five of them have members involved in the type of commemoration that
have been criticised."" Some were members of the Conservatives' previous alliance, the European People's party.
On Conservative Euroscepticism, Hague said: ""I always put the case to all American leaders that it is important to
distinguish between Europe's institutions and its capacity to act ... I have explained to her and others that she will be find
a Conservative government very active and activist from the very beginning in European affairs. ""
Later he said it would be a mistake for Tony Blair to become EU president. He has previously said in private that Blair
would be appointed ""over my dead body"".
http://www.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2009-10-10/irm-contras-scary-sequel
Iran-Contra's Scary Sequel
by Art Levine
The Daily Beast
October 10, 2009 I 6:55pm
Republicans have opened a new front against Obama, a southern front, south of the border—Latin America.
The clique of conservatives that has operated since the Iran-Contra scandal and held key policy offices in the
George W. Bush administration is waging war against Obama in part through Sen. Jim DeMint of South
Carolina.
A freshman on the Foreign Relations Committee with no previously known expertise on Latin America, DeMint
is best known for boasting that health care would be the ""Waterloo"" that will ""break"" Obama. He recently
provoked a nasty spat within the committee by requesting funding to travel to Honduras to ""assess"" the crisis.
The Obama administration favors reinstalling the democratically elected president, Manuel Zelaya, a leftist who
was expelled by the military in June. Committee Chairman John Kerry criticized DeMint for his ""intransigence""
in putting a hold on two Obama nominations for State Department jobs in Latin America, and initially denied
money for DeMint's trip. But Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell somehow found funding through the
Defense Department.
""DeMint has been using this issue cynically to hold hostage the entire U.S. policy on Latin America in order to
defend a coup,"" says Adam Isacson, a Latin American specialist at Washington's Center for International
Policy.
""Little Honduras has brought all of the ghosts of the Cold War out of the closet, and paralyzed policy by
provoking the [DeMint] holds,"" Julia Sweig, the director for Latin American Studies of the Council on Foreign
Relations, told me. Some Hill staffers are even blunter: ""These losers from the Bush administration who drove
Latin American policy off a frickin' cliff are trying to rescue their legacy,"" one aide told The Daily Beast.
A number of Democrats and foreign-policy experts contend the mounting right-wing attack on Latin American
policy has filled a void left by an Obama administration that was too slow to cut aid or take a firmer stance
against the president installed by the Honduran military, Roberto Micheletti. Driven partly by a desire to
appease opposition in Congress and distaste for left-wing populists the Obama administration ""slow-walked"" its
response to the coup this summer, Sweig says.
More recently, though, the administration has toughened its approach by cutting off some vital aid worth at least
$35 million and blocking Honduran officials' visas. The goal: to pressure the Micheletti regime to enter into
serious negotiations with the Organization of American States to restore the democratic government and Zelaya.
Informed observers say that indications of Micheletti's flexibility alarmed some right-wingers in Washington
and helped trigger DeMint's visit to buck up the regime's resistance.
An informal network of right-leaning American advocacy groups and ideologues was entangled in anti-Zelaya
legal and PR battles in Honduras before the coup. Among them: Otto Reich, a Cuban-American who headed the
State Department's now-defunct Office of Public Diplomacy during the Iran-Contra scandal, and was
subsequently investigated by a special joint congressional panel—and the U.S. Comptroller General, which
found he engaged in ""prohibited covert activities"" by using public funds to attack Reagan's critics. Reich, who
was later appointed by President George W. Bush to be assistant secretary for Western Hemisphere Affairs and
is now a private consultant, launched a media campaign against Zelaya before the coup alleging corruption.
""Your Loony Left sources say I was an architect of Iran-Contra like they say I'm an architect of the Zelaya
coup,"" he told me by phone from Panama. He disputes claims of illegal Iran-Contra activites as ""crap,""
asserting they were only based on a fired House staffer's unpublished memo. But Greg Grandin, a Latin
American history professor at NYU, has a darker view of Reich's role: ""It's kind of the origins of Swift
Boating,"" he says. ""It's all related to what he's doing now.""
Conservative supporters of the current Honduran government argue on arcane legal grounds against the
worldwide condemnation of the coup. ""It's not the first time all, the countries in the world have been wrong,""
Reich told me. He has criticized what he sees as erroneous reporting on Latin American controversies, taking
The New York Times to task for an article last Thursday that he says implied he was being paid to lobby on
behalf of the Micheletti regime. ""I guess my facts interfered with [the] story,"" he says. ""Can you believe some
of my sources say The New York Times is malicious and deserves the slow death it is experiencing?"" A
DeMint spokesman says the senator hasn't even met with Reich to talk about Honduras, although a Reich aide
says they've spoken to DeMint's staff.
Adding to the mystery of the coup, left-wingers in Latin America and the U.S. have floated what conservatives
say are unproven conspiracy theories that Reich somehow played a role in destabilizing Zelaya's regime. He
has firmly denied them to The Daily Beast: ""I cannot possibly answer all the Loony Left conspiracy charges
against me. But I will try: I had nothing to do with the removal of Zelaya."" But the rumors may add to his aura
of power as founder of Otto Reich Associates. He's drawn more attention to the new Honduras allegations by
penning a column for the Miami Herald boldly headlined, ""I Did Not Orchestrate Coup in Honduras.""
Perhaps the primary influence on DeMint's thinking has been the right-wing Honduran-American lawyer
Miguel Estrada, whose 2001 nomination to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit was rejected by the
Senate. In addition to Reich, other former Bush administration officials who have played key roles in
influencing DeMint and in spreading arguments for the Honduran regime include Roger Noriega, a former aide
to the late Sen. Jesse Helms (the far-right chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee) who also served as an
assistant secretary for Western Hemisphere Affairs from 2003 to 2005. On July 2, Noriega appeared on The
NewsHour with Jim Lehrer to argue the legitimacy of the new Honduran regime. He was identified as a former
ambassador to the Organization of American States and a visiting fellow of the American Enterprise Institute—
not as a paid agent for pro-regime forces.
Noriega officially registered his firm, Visions America, as representing a Honduran business group only in mid-
July. Yet, the Times reported, he worked with the Association of Honduran Manufacturers to set up meetings
between supporters of the regime and eight U.S. senators—including DeMint—in early July. That visit to
Washington by Honduran business and political figures from July 2 to July 10, Foreign Policy reported,
occurred at the same time as a House committee hearing during which Reich—along with a former Honduran
supreme court justice and Lanny Davis, a former Clinton administration official and now a lobbyist—testified
in favor of the current regime. Noriega's office declined to return phone calls about his work.
The lobbyist-organized visit also coincided with Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearings on Obama's
picks for top Latin American posts: Thomas Shannon, current assistant secretary for Western Hemisphere
Affairs, has been nominated to be Ambasssador to Brazil; and Arturo Valenzuela, director of Georgetown
University's Center for Latin American Studies and senior director for Inter-American Affairs at the National
Security Council during President Clinton's second term, has been tapped to be assistant secretary for Western
Hemisphere Affairs. Both Valenzuela and Shannon were approved by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
in late July. Julia Sweig of the Council on Foreign Relations observes, ""They're not polarizing figures.""
But for now they're hostages in DeMint's war. At the July 8 nomination hearings, Valenzuela angered DeMint
by defending the administration's decision to condemn the overthrow as a coup: ""In my studies of military
coups in Latin America, this was a classic military coup,"" Valenzuela said. DeMint's critics contend that he has
continually refused compromise offers from both State Department officials and fellow senators to lift his holds,
including the promise of an extensive floor debate on Honduras before a floor vote on the nominees.
DeMint's spokesperson, Wesley Denton, says he's acting in good faith out of genuine concern about an
important crisis. ""If these nominees are such a top priority for Democrats, then why hasn't Senator Reid brought
them to the floor?"" he asks. ""There is nothing Senator DeMint can do to stop a full debate and roll-call vote on
them."" Technically that's true, but it would be a rare violation of a Senate tradition to do so. DeMint has taken
up the issue of Honduras, Denton claims, because, ""the State Department's actions were directly relevant to two
nominees seeking the committee's approval.""
Yet before DeMint took up the crusade on Honduras—in what critics say is yet another vehicle to ""break""
Obama—one congressional observer jokes, ""He couldn't find Honduras on a map.""
Art Levine, a contributing editor of The Washington Monthly, has written for Mother Jones, The American
Prospect, The New Republic, The Atlantic, Slate.com, Salon. corn, and numerous other publications. He also
blogs regularly on labor, health, and other reform issues for In These Times and Huffington Post.
For inquiries, please contact The Daily Beast at editorial@thedailybeast.com."
2805,Joe lieberman wants to talk to you about his recent trip to iraq and afghanistan with mccain.
2806,"Immigrant Visa Services in Honduras
FYI"
2808,Fyi.
2809,Did u get memo on arab donor support? Do u approve?
2810,Thai 00000000000000
2811,"Oops my email acting up.
Eap is asking you to call Thai foreign minister kasit regarding the case of the russian arms dealer viktor bout. Are you ok
doing this call in the next day or so?
Below is call sheet and I also faxed to the house.
Purpose of Call: To underscore the importance we place on a the Royal Thai Government's successful appeal of the
court decision rejecting the extradition of Russian arms dealer Viktor Bout to the United States and the importance of
his continued detention pending the outcome of the appeal.
Background: On August 11, 2009, a Thai judge denied a U.S. extradition request of accused arms smuggler Viktor Bout
(pron: BOOT) to face trial in New York for conspiracy to kill U.S. nationals and officers; acquire and use anti-aircraft
missiles; and provide material support to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). The Thai Attorney
General's Office will appeal the ruling. FM Kasit has been a strong ally on Burma and released a forward-leaning
Chairman's statement on behalf of ASEAN following ASSK's conviction."
2812,fyi
2813,Fyi
2814,Fyi
2815,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 26, 2009 5:30 AM
H
Fw: Wheels-Up for OAS Mission in Honduras at 1858 Eastern"
2816,Will call as I drive in about 20 min
2818,"HRC —
They are looking for your sign off on this as early this am — the final will have any edits recommended by Jim.
Take a look (my only thought is it sounds defensive which I know is our posture but many of these points could be stated
affirmatively — the content is fine).
cdm"
2820,Got it - will get a new draft
2821,"Yes, we're trying to find a date that works for Les, but he is a little, shall we say picky."
2822,"We've been trying for months, he's a little high maintenance, and has a habit as you're seeing of complaining to anyone
who will listen.
But we'll get there. This is my mission for today."
2823,What do u want to do about kennedy? Statement or letter?
2824,FYI
2825,"Holbrooke asking to talk to as soon as possible.
Also can u do secure mitchell call at 10:30?"
2826,They will call the secure ste on 3rd floor at 10:30.
2828,"This is kennedy statement about to go out. Will be joint from u and wjc.
Senator Ted Kennedy was one of the most important and influential leaders of our time, whose five decades as Senator
from Massachusetts helped to shape America's history and chart our shared future. During our time in the White
House, we were thankful for his fierce advocacy and support for universal health care and his work to provide health
coverage to low-income children. Without his tireless efforts, America would not be as close to achieving health care
reform as we are today.Continuing the legacy left by his older brothers, his lifelong pursuit of civil rights and justice for
all moved America forward to form a more perfect union. But beyond his death, his legacy of public service will live on in
millions of young people across our nation who now have the chance to serve through the Edward M. Kennedy Serve
America Act, which will expand AmeriCorps and other youth service opportunities. He loved his country, his wife Vicki,
and his incredible children and grandchildren. We are proud to have known him, worked alongside him, and called him
our friend. Our thoughts and prayers are with his family and the people of Massachusetts during this difficult time."
2829,None. They are saying to be announced.
2830,FYI
2831,"Ban is in a meeting. They will call back as soon as he is out.
We are waiting to hear back from the thais."
2832,Ok.
2833,"Ban can talk at 2:45
U want to do that?"
2834,"White house saying they have have heard the funeral may be Saturday morning around 10:00 am in Boston. There
would be a Celebration of Life event Friday night at the JFK Library.
Will get u more info as I get it.
.."
2835,We'll work on it.
2836,"I'll follow up
Might make most sense for WJC to issue a quote that talks about you too, like the Howard one"
2837,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 26, 2009 5:12 PM
H
kathleen B6
'"
2838,"Kerry
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 26, 2009 5:13 PM
H"
2839,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 26, 2009 7:21 PM
H
Vicky kennedv lust called the office back for wjc. Said the message meant a great deal to her. If you want to call her, she
is at:"
2840,Yes
2841,"See WI
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 26, 2009 8:39 PM
H
Fw:"
2842,Fyi
2843,"RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6
Fyi"
2844,"We are working with Lyn to try to better determine the specific needs at Heal Africa. The Norwegian development
staff is on vacation but we should connect shortly. I'm going to try to steer their assistance to Heal Africa if I can.
Otherwise, we've had marathon meetings with all the key players to follow up on your trip to DRC. There is so much that
needs to be done and Congress is already asking for reports."
2845,F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764566 Date: 07/31/2015
2846,"Attached and enclosed below is the demarche and letter that went out, reflecting your comments.
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE/LETTER PRIOR TO AUGUST 28 UNASUR SUMMIT
REF: A. STATE 86734
B. STATE 82581
1.(SBU) This is an action request, see paras 4 - 6.
2.(SBU) On August 14, the USG and Colombian government
provisionally agreed ad referendum to the text of a
bilateral Defense Cooperation Agreement (DCA) (septel).
We expect the final agreement may be signed in Bogota in
about a month, following a final review by both sides. As
noted in reftels, the DCA would permit the United States
access to several Colombian military bases and facilitate
effective bilateral cooperation on security matters in
Colombia. It would not/not authorize establishment of any
U.S. bases or ports, nor would it result in an overall
increase in the number of U.S. military personnel or
U.S.-citizen civilian contractors in Colombia.
3.(SBU) On August 18, the Secretary and Colombian FM
Jaime Bermudez met in Washington to discuss the DCA,
including the importance of coordinating our public
affairs and diplomatic strategies (septel to follow).
There is some concern that the upcoming Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR) summit would become a regional
referendum on the DCA. Colombian President Alvaro Uribe
will attend the summit provided that a full range of
regional security matters can be discussed, not just the
DCA. In this context, we are reaching out to selected
UNASUR members to ask that they raise other regional
security issues beyond the DCA.
4. (SBU) Action requested for Santiago, Asuncion, and
Lima: that you find an opportunity prior to the August 28
summit to raise the importance of discussing the full
range of regional security topics during the summit, and
not merely the DCA, with appropriate high levels of host
government.
265
5. (SBU) Action requested for all: that Ambassadors to
UNASUR member states deliver the attached letter from the
Secretary to host governments in advance of the August 28
summit.
6. (U) Begin text:
Dear Madam/Mr. Minister:
I wanted to take a moment to write to you and your
colleagues about the upcoming summit of the Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR), scheduled for August 28 in
Bariloche. UNASUR provides an important forum to address
the issues and challenges that affect the region. The
United States supports the formation and effective
functioning of regional groups such as UNASUR. They
promote stability, cohesion, and leadership on key issues,
and ensure the best possible communication between
nations.
As you know, our common neighbor,
Colombia, has faced an ongoing threat from an unholy
alliance of terrorist groups funded by the insidious
illegal narcotics trade. These terrorists have threatened
the security of average Colombians and sought to overthrow
by violence and corruption successive,
democratically-elected Colombian governments. The actions
of these groups also threaten the security of other
countries in the hemisphere, sometimes directly, in many
ways indirectly. Over the last decade, Colombians have
beat back this threat, to the benefit of us all. My
country is proud of the role we have been able to play in
this effort.
This battle is far from won. Our governments and people
are collectively forced to find ways to protect ourselves
and our institutions from such threats. I am certain
these very issues will be addressed at the upcoming
summit, including the recently concluded Defense
Cooperation Agreement (DCA). We understand the
sensitivities associated with U.S. military activities in
the hemisphere and the questions your government may have
regarding the scope and extent of this agreement. I hope
the efforts made in the last few weeks by both my
government and the Colombian government have helped
address those questions.
I would like to take this opportunity to make several key
points about the DCA. First, this agreement is a
bilateral agreement with Colombia to deepen our
cooperation on security challenges within Colombia,
permitting U.S. access to specified agreed Colombian
26fi
facilities to undertake mutually agreed activities on
Colombian territory. It is a bilateral agreement that
does not pose any threat or risk for the citizens of other
nations. On the contrary, our mutual efforts to combat
drug trafficking benefit the security of the region as a
whole. The agreement does not permit the establishment of
U.S. bases in Colombia. It will not result in an increase
in the U.S. military presence in Colombia, and we do not
seek any such increase. Activities undertaken at or from
Colombian bases by U.S. persons will be coordinated in
advance by Colombian authorities. All activities will be
based on full respect for the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity of states, and
non-interventionism.
We are committed to being as forthcoming as possible in
addressing concerns about this bilateral agreement with
nations in the region, and we have endeavored to do so in
recent weeks through a variety of mechanisms. As concerns
or questions arise, I hope that you will feel free to
reach out to us to seek clarification.
The UNASUR summit provides a unique opportunity for the
organization to address a range of security issues that
affect the hemisphere, and I salute your leadership for
deciding to discuss these matters. The security
challenges affecting our hemisphere, and your nations in
particular, are pressing and grave. Our firm belief is
that a collective and collaborative approach to these
matters is essential. It is our commitment to work with
UNASUR nations to help address these concerns.
Sincerely yours,
Hillary Rodham Clinton
End text."
2848,"Will do.
Mccain also called wjc office today asking to come to cgi."
2849,Ok
2850,"Secure fax coming in 5 min.
OA"
2851,"Also, steinmeir asking to talk to u about afghanistan either today between 3:30 and 4. Or tomorrow afternoon."
2852,"Yes, trying to find a time to meet with Cherie. Also, fyi, a few years ago, I worked to advise Sheikha Mosa on
how to organize her office vis a vis her foundation, etc. She was always taken by how effective you were as
First Lady. I worked with Booz Allen on the project. She is very impressive."
2853,"Sorry to email you again on this but have you a date and time for sheikha moser see below
Sent from my HTC FUZETM, a Windows Mobile® smartphone from AT&T
This message has been scanned by MailController - www.MailController.altohiway.com"
2854,No - he's supposed to call me first
2856,"- Jim Jones wants to talk to you as soon as you are free. Can be non secure.
- jimmy carter called for you. Did not leave subject
- peres confirmed for 12:45."
2857,Griginal Message
2858,"FYI
----Griginal Message--
Slaughter, Anne-Marie
Sent: Friday, September 18, 2009 "",j.37 PM
Huma
Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob i
Subject: For S rothkopf review of her speech on foreign policy blog
If u go to the actual website it has a great pie.
Who says eAi good c.,,
,Acv changes come in with a bang? Fri, 09/18/2009 - 5:53pm
important shifts in U.S. policy come quietly. They don't make the evening news. They don't reverberate in
the blogosphet.e. rhey j,.st creep in and gradually take effect. But their consequences can be far-reaching.
Tuk,;cay, arzo:.Julz. 'State Hilary Clinton gave an address discussing U.S. priorities for the UN
Gen.,
ral Asseinhly meeting next 'vcr;.. S;.ie focused on non-proliferation and, naturally, by extension, Iran. But then, in
answer to a :-
.1m,stio;-i, she gave an anSwer that one top State Department official characterized as ""historic"" because it
""Oir tilt t;r:it coll.uption as a national security rather than just as a 'good governance' issue.""
coniak?.,.rt i-esonates on several leVeli. On the one, perhaps ciosest to today's headlines, it ties in directly to the
e,
;ep31
-t: icientffie,z, abuse of government power in Afghanistan as an equal threat to the insurgency. As
such it sends a very powerful message to the Karzai government that unless they seriously clean up their act they could
go '1.com aeirig centcai oi. allied e
-ncorts in their country to being a target of our efforts to promote change.
Corrupzort ,s the file's blood of many of the most substantial national security
thear:r the COACeril is iilegal arms sales or proliferation of weapons ofmass
d,,st-ilrVon, terrorism or insurgencits, government stability or functioning free markets, public health or public safety,
drug:,or num& -sat'nciz:np„ H.-1011 cion't it:lei-lay and battle corruption true progress is impossible. As such, to shrug it off
as n 'de; thus guar.;nteeing ft never once gets the attention of senior officials or the resources required
to address it -- ran woise„ to simply ;;LEggFsv it is endemic the world over and simply a way business gets done among
eift.s-s;ksz:iPci:.41,;in F:nleq'ing oir.:(1d. IS simply reckless.
:"",e; . • is V, eie.ment of top national security threats ... requires far more than
ei'n.
,;•ts capabilities of NZ:10s like Transparency International. It is a job that on the
i;;;teligence ',..'esources to identify and track targets and on the other demands the
i■wC.Ivt;Ire■q i; t.e,
:asiSe many of those who an:, the offenders, like Karzai, are senior officials, top
terry-1st or crimli.:3i syndicates. These are the not-so-super members of what I called in my last
elnablers and beneficiaries of some of the most dangerous types of
r • ' • ; ?
Ind COMOrcy, remarks are important. But if she and the
auin;nscra,:ion ;.,,an sy.sternati,;aini go after the Co( Nption that is linked to many if not most of our greatest
international concerns, if her casual remark is indicative of a new resolve to confront this threat (best described for the
world in FP editorin-chief Moises Nia!ni's definitive work on the subject Illicit) then it is one of the few examples I can
thiri4 i ' .Dower"" that real deserves that description."
2859,111A
2860,"JP ISt fyi — 1 am CI4ra it will h fin"" Plifarthtally
B6
Flrorn carter, Pat
Sent: Friday, September 18, 2009 1;48 PM
To: Samuelson, Heather F; Pe** Laura
Cc: Kennedy, Patrick F
r I;Ii.ti r:..tri no, il,co.r.t.ww.4.1
FYI — interim clearance denieu.
NOTIFICATI:ON
Ctii-zzity II
In't:e,*('!1.2irance Denied -
Pr,rr:,
..lant to your request, and in .,Jr.xordance with E
xecutive Order 12968, Section 3.3, your request to grant an
ittedm clearance to i3 denied. Due to the fact this is not a final security clearance
d-.‘termination. a decision not to „rant an interim clearance is not subject to appeal under the provisions of the
i; 6 3,:o negKive inference .ha'
..). -made regarding the denial of an individual's interim clearance, which
solely mean,
: thatthere irwestigative work that must take place in the US or abroad that will take additional
tiorf to -
...or.nply v.7'
.,:th national standard.s prior to a final clearance determination being made.
ma`' net &sowed acc?.,sE, to classified information until the appropriate investigation is
a firia' cluo.ision is made.
clAr Customer Service Center toll-free at 1-866-643-INFO(4636), or
..so.
.;2.rilirc;teanncegstatexov,
Nate. '1,""'hi7 is n F,ff,
id-only,emailr rile,ase do not reply to this message.
C,.41c.;:-; of anti
oi
7.1"
2861,"Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.gov>
Monday, September 07, 2009 2:05 PM
H; Huma Abedin
Re: Terry Murray
I have this cell for her-
B6
I've called it several times to try to confirm it is right, but there is no voice mail box for it and I haven't yet gotten an
answer when I call. III keep digging."
2863,Phil wanted you to see before your turkish call.
2864,Lavrov asking to talk between now and 11am. He didn't leave a topic.
2865,Benita ferraro waldner just called again about UNESCO election in Paris.
2866,"Oscar, I've sent hrc a lot of emails on calls. Can you send her this summary with latest info?
- benita ferraro waldner called about UNESCO election in Paris. Esther brimmer is returning.
-lavrov wants to talk before llam.
- nalbandian call: sending you a all sheet and phil is hoping you will make this call today."
2867,Are you willing to call nalbandian today? See phils note below and we also have a call sheet coming your way.
2868,"Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.gov>
Monday, September 07, 2009 4:08 PM
H; Huma Abedin
Re:
You do. You took it in the senate before you left. You signed it for him. III see if we can get another copy."
2869,Oscar pls print for hrc. She's expecting it.
2871,Not sure - they will advise
2873,"Strange. Meeting was confirmed several days ago. In fact, her office called back to say it was the only time that worked
for her. Its at 7pm on the 24th."
2874,"PVerveer
Saturday, September 19, 2009 10:15 PM
H
Fwd: list of 5 update
1541-TransmissionEtatdebesoin.pdf
Thought you'd be interested in this --
on the status of the ""notorious 5"" you raised with Kabila.
I will get to Johnnie Carson too. I think we will have to follow up through best channel."
2875,Will call you shortly - we're trying to fig out later in the day
2876,"Ill call the senate photographers office first thing in the morning to ask about getting another copy. There is also a small
chance we have one in your photo files- ill check that too."
2877,"I was just thinking about this last week. I'm going to order some tomorrow so that they'll be in your office when you get
back from unga. For some reason our ny supplier just stopped sending them after the new year. III set up an account
with them to ensure we get regular deliveries again."
2878,Will do
2879,"FYI: We will send today for your review and approval a demarche describing the circumstances in which the U.S. would
walk out of speeches at the UN General Assembly and asking countries to join us in the walkout. Note that we are
differing from past practice when we simply did not have anyone in the U.S. seat during speeches by certain countries.
This year an appropriate-level individual will be behind the U.S. placard for all speeches and will remain unless these
redlines are crossed.
This demarche is going out to EU member state capitals, as well as Oslo, Reykjavik, Ottawa, Canberra, Wellington, Tokyo,
Seoul, Buenos Aires, Bogota, San Jose, and Montevideo. USUN asks that our posts deliver the demarche in advance of an
EU political directors meeting on this issue in New York Monday morning our time.
The background portion of the cable, which discusses EU internal dynamics on this issue, is classified, but the
unclassified talking points will come to you for your review."
2880,"Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
2882,"Yes, and we can certainly do"
2883,"Jan, will be in touch later today."
2884,"Either Mondays or Tuesdays are best -- at one point, you had mentioned a meal. Would you still like to do that or just a
normal meeting?"
2885,"Fyi
Philippe and michael turner will be at first stop Ill meet you with pam mills at second stop
119"
2886,"Apparently you can't get away from me. We're sharing the FT op-ed page tomorrow. Here's
my piece....
Thanks again for Friday. Much favorable comment. Good luck at the UNGA.
President Barack Obama's announcement of a new system.for protecting America's
allies against Iranian missiles has ignited charges that he is scaling back the one he
inherited from George W. Bush as a concession to the Russians.
In fact, the Obama plan is a big improvement on the Bush one, and it is designed to
counter an evolving Iranian threat, not to mollify Russian anxieties.
Mr Bush's decision to put 10 missile interceptors in Poland and an associated radar in
the Czech Republic was based on a concern that Iran was developing long-range rockets
that could hit the US. The Bush system would have been less effective against shorter-
range Iranian missiles, and it would have left much of Europe, notably including America's
ally Turkey, unprotected.
Over the last several years, the Iranians have shifted their efforts from developing a few
long-range rockets to deploying large numbers of shorter-range ones that pose an
immediate danger to southeastern Europe and the Middle East, as well as to US forces
stationed there. Unlike Mr Bush's, Mr Obama's plan will quickly field a missile-defence
capability to address an existing threat. It can be upgraded to deal with longer-range
Iranian missiles in the future.
The Central Europeans who have reacted to the decision with apprehension or alarm
should recognize that the replacement of a conceptually flawed plan with a more credible
one strengthens the bonds of transatlantic defence.
The view from Moscow has been clouded by outright paranoia. Military experts there
suspected that the US rockets in Poland, while advertised as defensive, could be used
offensively, even pre-emptively, against Russia. Laying to rest that far-fetched scenario
was not the prime motivation for Mr Obama's decision, nor should it have been. However,
by removing what has been a gratuitous irritant in bilateral relations, the president has
improved the prospects for US-Russian arms control negotiations now underway in
Geneva.
Those talks could produce by December a new treaty reducing numbers of strategic -
that is, intercontinental — weapons. If ratified by the US Senate (which will not be easy,
given the ferocity of the partisan wars in Washington), the US and Russia will be on track
for further reductions in the future. Mr Obama and Russian President Dmitri Medvedev,
who are due to meet in New York this week, have jointly called for the eventual goal of
eliminating nuclear weapons.
As they and their successors take steps in that direction, they will have to grapple with a
stark paradox of the nuclear age: mutual deterrence depends on each side being
vulnerable to retaliation from the other. If either side has enough defences to trump the
other side's offence, the mutuality of deterrence breaks down and one or both sides will be
on hair-trigger, making war more likely in a crisis.
American statesmen pounded this inescapable truth into the heads of their initially
sceptical Soviet counterparts 40 years ago. The result was the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM)
treaty signed by Richard Nixon and Leonid Brezhnev in 1972. By limiting the defensive
capability of both superpowers, the ABM treaty was a necessary companion piece to a
series of treaties setting ceilings on offensive weaponry. Because nuclear weapons were
expected to with us forever, the ABM treaty was meant to last in perpetuity.
While the Soviets were converted to the logic of restricting defence, Ronald Reagan
was not. The late US president championed the development of a space-based
comprehensive shield that would make offensive weapons — and therefore mutual
deterrence — ""impotent and obsolete.""
Many experts believed Reagan's vision, which they derisively nicknamed Star Wars, was
an impossible dream. So did his successor, George H. W. Bush, who treated the program
with benign neglect while negotiating with the Russians in the Strategic Arms Reduction
Talks (START) begun by Mr Reagan.
The second president Bush reversed his father's policy. He greatly weakened the
START process, pulled the US out of the ABM treaty and sought to revive a national
missile defence (NMD) system. His decision to build the interceptor and radar sites in
Poland and the Czech Republic was, as one of his aides told me at the time, in large
measure about ""pouring concrete for what will eventually be a global NMD.""
Key officials of the Obama administration — including the president himself, who studied
arms control in college — understand the linkage between reduction of offences and
regulation of defences. However, they have avoided raising that issue in the context of last
week's decision. That is partly because they want their plan to be judged on its own
merits, vis-à-vis the Iranian threat. But it is because they have more than enough fights
with the Republicans without further energizing the right wing by trying to reinstate the
principles of the ABM treaty.
Yet sooner or later the US administration will have to grasp the nettle of regulating
strategic defences. Otherwise, continued reductions in strategic nuclear offences will be
either impossible or, worse, dangerous.
The author is president of the Brookings Institution."
2888,I understand cherly forwarded you the unga demarche points Do you have edits to them?
2890,"taking jan off
we have been talking to wjc team about a dinner friday night post cgi (that i believe you and wjc discussed) and if we do
that, we can include her there.
you should know that barbra striesand and jim brolin have also askedif you and wjc want to have dinner friday night if
you are interested. her performance is sat night"
2891,"does it make sense to do it every monday so you have your series of meetings the top of the week and then people can
get direction for the week?"
2892,Ok
2893,"Don't think oscar was able to get this to you before you left. Its a few ny notes from chris falvo before the school event:
TO: Secretary Clinton
FROM: Chris Falvo
DATE: September 8, 2009
RE: NY Local Issues
Schools - NYC public schools open on Wednesday, September 9th. As a result, you will be visiting a charter school that
opened a couple of weeks ago instead of a public school. Mike Mulgrew, who took over as President of the UFT when
Randi left for AFT, will be present at the event and should be acknowledged in your remarks. His aides who you have
met numerous times, Dick Riley and Bridget Rein, will also be present. Mike appointed Dick as his press secretary last
month.
H1N1 - Mayor Bloomberg did a rollout earlier this week on NYC's plans to handle this health concern, and a significant
portion discusses schools. Unlike what was done in the Spring, this time closing schools will be a last resort. Reason is
that they found kids still contaminate each other by going to movies and playgrounds when the schools are closed, so
instead they are asking sick kids to stay home.
And if four percent of a student body experiences the flu on a single day, a doctor will visit to monitor the situation.
Every student in a NYC school will be offered free H1N1 flu shots or mist once a vaccine is available.
Primary day - September 15th is primary day. In addition to Bill Thompson for Mayor, the primary races that have been
closely followed are Public Advocate and City Comptroller. Running for Public Advocate are Councilmember Eric Gioia,
Councilmember Bill DeBlasio, former Public Advocate Mark Green, and civil rights lawyer Norman Siegel. Running for
Comptroller are four Councilmembers: John Lui, Melinda Katz, David Yassky, and David Weprin.
Rangel - As of last week House Speaker Pelosi plans to allow Rep. Rangel to keep his chairmanship of the Ways and
Means Committee despite his ethics problems. According to amended forms recently filed with the House, Rangel failed
to disclose at least $800,000 in assets and income since 2002. This comes amid a House ethics investigation into his
failure to report income from and pay taxes on a villa in the Dominican Republic and his ties to a real-estate developer
who leased him four rent-stabilized apartments in New York. The panel is also looking into Rangel's fundraising and
whether he improperly used his office to raise money for a public policy center in his name at the City University of New
York. Rangel has denied any wrongdoing and says its accounting mistakes and simple oversights. The NY Post and
Buffalo News have called for his resignation. Speaking at a health-care forum in Washington Heights last Tuesday, Rangel
said that bias and prejudice toward Obama are fueling opposition to health-care reform. ""Some Americans have not
gotten over the fact that Obama is president of the United States. They go to sleep wondering, 'How did this happen?' ""
Rangel said. Rangel then likened the battle over health-care expansion for the uninsured to the fight for civil rights.
""Why do we have to wait for the right to vote? Why can't we get what God has given us? That is the right to live as
human beings and not negotiate with white southerners and not count the votes. Just do the right thing,"" he said. After
the forum, Rangel insisted he was not smearing opponents as racists. ""What I'm saying is, if you watch the town-hall
meetings, people were angry and did not care what the answer was to some of their questions. They were angry with
their member of Congress, period,"" he said. Rangel's comments came less than two weeks after Governor Paterson
claimed he has been the victim of a racist white media -- and also suggested that opposition to Obama's plan is racially
driven. The White House disagreed with Paterson's comments.
120
Little League World Series - Staten Island's little league team, the South Shore Nationals, made it to the Little League
World Series, but they lost the title two weeks ago with a 4-1 loss to the Southwest Regional Champs, McAllister Park
American, from San Antonio.
9/11 - Jay Winuk, founder of the My Good Deed organization, and brother of 9/11 victim, Glenn Winuk, notified us that
DOJ has finally award his brother the 9/11 Heroes Medal of Valor. You were very supportive of Jay's efforts and wrote
letters to DOJ. Glenn worked at a law firm near the WTC, but was also a volunteer FF. After helping to evacuate his
building he went to the WTC area to help and unfortunately died when the South Tower fell. Senator Schumer and Rep
Pete King held a press conference on Tuesday making the announcement at a park named in Glenn's honor in their
hometown of Jericho, Long Island. Fyi, Jay will be at Friday's 9/11 Servicenation event.
121"
2894,Fyi - left messages for him on cell.
2895,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, September 08, 2009 9:13 AM
H
Fw: (Reuters) Partial results show Karzai winning Afghan poll"
2896,"we have 2 rooms with 2 set ups.
one at a conference table and one with sofas chairs etc for the middle eastern ones. but we can change and make both
at a conference table. please let me know if you want to do it that way"
2898,"that is right
Esther will keep sending updates"
2899,Happy to set up moving forward. Is 45 minutes long enough?
2900,Will do.
2901,"I'm seeing Yunus tom'w. We're both speaking to the Hilton Foundation. He wants to meet with me there. I will learn
more."
2902,"This is a very rough first cut at the CGI speech, mostly to give you an idea of structure, themes, and some of the
substance. It has a long way to go. We are still waiting for feedback and for input from various people, including Jack.
We will have a much improved draft by Monday night.
I'm not sure if you are in Washington or NY, but will fax this to Whitehaven in case you are there. Thanks."
2904,I will
2905,FYI - see traffic below
2906,FYI B6
2907,"Faxing to you there. Keep in mind that it is rough and has placeholders and some notional sections in brackets. Thx.
Sent from my iPhone
On Sep 20, 2009, at 10:18 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> I'm in NY. Thx."
2908,I have been back to them and yes they are all set to see you then.
2909,"r direct office line
assistant Karen answers that phone.
T m
She has been
een in Russia and just got back yesterday.
The cell number we had for her is outdated.
Her office is going to call me back with a new cell number. (I think her assistant wants to get her approval before she
gives it to me). I'll update our records when we get it."
2910,I would love to see you I keep seeing you on TV and feel so proud of you
2911,"Can you call into ops for him now?
He says its time-sensitive and can be on non-secure line.
127"
2912,"FuchsMH@state.gov
III get numbers"
2913,"FuchsMH@state.goy
III get numbers"
2914,"FuchsMH@state.gov
III get numbers"
2915,"Phone numbers:
Office: 202 647 1709
Bb:
Cell"
2916,"Phone numbers:
Office: 202 647 1709
Bb:
Cell:"
2917,"Phone numbers:
Office: 202 647 1709
Bb:
Cel"
2918,I'm having breakfast with Ken Salazar. Will call when that's over. 9:30ish.
2919,"Wouldn't tell him U have a $ # & will work with him within it. State has just agreed to a meeting 9/28 to determine
Palau's needs. Such a
meeting is required by the Compact as a step before agreeing on aid.
Having a # before makes a sham of the meeting. Palau has rejected the # & wouldn't accept it even if the Pres. did. He
won't because it would deplete Trust Fund by 2024 or so altho it is to last thru 2044 term of base rights, forcing Palau to
hope US will replenish fund in
2024. Explaining this to Jake too.
Jeff
B6"
2921,FYI
2924,FYI
2925,1 A
2926,ALMOST 3 MONTHS - SENIOR AIDE
2927,"I talked to Yunus. She is making any progess very difficult. The health project he discussed with yoiu can't get OKs from
govt for Nursing school, univ health center, corporate partnerships, etc. If she hears it's Grameen, she stands in way of
licenses, etc, even tho it benefits the country.
He was hoping there might be some way to assure her that he has NO intention of getting into politics in any way and
that she can use him effectively to make the country a model in ways that Grameen can do that. There is some deep
personal antagonism that he can't fathom. Very sad development."
2928,FYI
2929,"FYI
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, September 08, 2009 12:46 PM
H
FW: 9/8 Senior Staff and Deputies Meetings"
2930,"He called again. At home
277"
2931,"I added a bunch of names today - about 40 or so. I have a few more to do, and will do those tomorrow when I can get
your blackberry back. I'm also making a master list for you of everyone I've added/updated so you can see."
2932,FYI
2933,I will ask but I think if she senses he's bewhind thew request matters will get worse.
2934,"Just saw the emails to myP7account. Will follow up with Froman and Nelson.
B6"
2936,Great - I'm updating it as we speak and will send a revised shortly.
2937,"B6
RELEASE IN
PART B5,B6"
2938,"I will be out of the office Monday October 12 through Wednesday October 14. I will have very little access to email. If
you need to reach me on those days, please email Monica Hanley at hanleymr@state.gov, or call Monica at (202) 647-
5601."
2939,FYI
2940,"I will be out of the office until Tuesday, October 13 with limited access to e-mail. If you need immediate assistance,
please contact Pat Grimes at 202-647-9022.
Andrew J. Shapiro
Assistant Secretary for Political-Military Affairs Department of State
2201 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20520"
2942,"sorry - just seeing b/c on my but have logged a call to him.
On Sat, Oct 9, 2010 at 7:18 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Could you try to contact Mark Penn to confirm he no longer represents Thaksin before I call Thai PM at 9:30?
Thx."
2943,fyi
2944,"Thanks Madame Secretary -- we are working this on Jim's schedule currently I believe but the Admiral really wants you
to do this. We certainly want more attention to the still very tentative military dialogue between US and PRC and
Admiral Owens is very much engaged on this. It's your call but your involvement would certainly help this nascent
initiative gain altitude. Best Kurt"
2945,Yes and then you should announce it.
2946,I can have it announced here on Monday - can't today
2947,FYI
2948,Importance: High
2949,He's in the hamptons fyi. We walked by his place yesterday.
2950,2cin
2953,"... on Armenia-Turkey. Tough stuff, I know. Great accomplishment. I'm in Greece. George P will be big help. S"
2956,"What a remarkable achievement to get the Turks and Armenians to come this far together. You are deservedly getting
good poSitive press for your efforts.
I just wanted you to know that the women in NI with whom you ""walked the walk"" over the years are eagerly looking
forward to seeing you. They were so incredibly helpful during your campaign telling the story of what you did to support
them, and as we know -- and as they have shown -- women are critical both to the peace process and to the peace
holding. Inez is planning to welcome you with a few words -- as she has done for over a decade. I will be with you all in
spirit."
2958,"09/22/2019
FYI"
2960,Importance: High
2961,FYI -- this is not us doing this.
2962,FYI
2963,"Inside CGI.. More later.
This is written from my BlackBerry."
2964,Are you free now? What number?
2965,FYI
2966,"Seems the best for a bad situation.
Moves the public discussion from settlement freeze to final status. Keeps some pressure on the parties. And seems like you will play a
more public role, which is good. (You have more credibility on both sides than anyone).
Going forward, if Bibi continues to be the obstacle, you will need to fmd the ground from which you can make his politics uneasy. I
think you can do that even with current concerns in Israel about US posture. But it will be easier as we rebuild trust so that our future
admonitions are accepted. (An HRC trip there to reframe perceptions?).
Finally, need to be mindful of Abu Mazen's politics. Taking a lot of criticism for meeting with Bibi without settlement freeze.
Sandy
This is written from my BlackBerry."
2967,RELEASE IN PART B6
2968,"Yes, I read the story yesterday and have been in touch with Glamour and our post. I think her family needs to be
compensated in some way because they raise feeding her and transportation as expenses they can't meet in order to
send her to school.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
2969,"I think your speech in N.I. is among your best as SecState and an effort should be made to publish
the heart of it in the International Herald Tribune, Irish papers and a British paper (perhaps the
Guardian). I am doubtful a US paper would publish a long excerpt pared to a long -op-ed but
identified as an excerpt of your speech, but one that might is the Boston Globe. Sid"
2970,Ok
2971,"cheryl.mill _
Saturday, August 29, 2009 5:41 AM
H
Fw: Other USAID names
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
2972,K
2974,"Magazine
The Power Grid
Back From the Death Panel How the public option, helped by a congressman looking for an issue and a shrewdly silent White House,
returned from the brink.
•Published Oct 11, 2009
On the night last week when much of Washington was joyously weeping over the seal of approval bestowed on the Baucus health-care
bill by the Congressional Budget Office, Anthony Weiner was in his quarters in the Rayburn Building, merrily pissing all over the
legislation instead. ""It's just too weak,"" he told me. ""It doesn't do enough It doesn't achieve real cost savings. There's no real
competition. It's pretty much a wish list for the insurance companies."" And those were merely Weiner's substantive criticisms of the
bill. His political assessment was even harsher: ""It's effectively dead,"" he said. Not a droplet of Weiner's dismissal of the Baucus
plan came as any sort of shock; he's been trashing the Senate Finance Committee's efforts for weeks. What's surprising is that anyone
gives a fig what Weiner has to say about the topic in the first place. Until six months ago, after all, the congressman was known more
for his yearning to acquire the keys to Gracie Mansion than his mastery of the arcana of Medicare reimbursement rates. In fact, as
Weiner would be the first to admit, his interest in, knowledge of, and record on health-care reform were perilously close to
nonexistent. And yet, since May, when he concluded that taking on Mike Bloomberg was a challenge that went beyond the Sisyphean
into the realm of the just plain silly, Weiner has emerged as one of the few real stars in the marathon health-care debate: the clearest
and savviest (and, as always, loudest and noodgiest) voice in favor of the public option. And though it's plain that whatever bill
eventually lands on Barack Obama's desk—and, yes, I think the odds are now close to overwhelming that a big pile of health-care
paper will wind up there—won't be anything close to Weiner's single-payer dream, his role in framing the terms of the discussion has
been more than salutary. In some non-obvious ways, you could argue that it's been essential. I should confess at the outset that I have
a long-standing soft spot for Weiner, whom I first met more than twenty years ago, when he was a budding Chuck Schumer protégé
and we played on the same Capitol Hill softball team. Weiner then was strikingly similar to Weiner now: amped-up, ambitious,
wicked smart, forever gauging all the angles, unafraid of being (actually, proud of being) a royal pain in the tuchis. All the qualities, in
other words, that have served him so well in the wrangle over health care. Weiner describes his efflorescence on the subject as a
matter of opportunism, in the best sense of the word. ""This was one of those unusual issues where we really didn't have a mother ship
that was directing the message, and that created an entrepreneurial environment,"" he says. ""You didn't have the president out there
speaking clearly about what he wanted. And among my colleagues, there weren't people that jumped out who either had a comfort
with the material or weren't intimidated by the blowback"" Weiner laughs. ""Frankly, I like the blowback. After my thirteenth town-
hall meeting, someone on my staff said, 'I can't tell if you're a sadist or a masochist.— Weiner is right about the nature of the vacuum
that he smartly stepped in to fill, but there are at least two other proximate causes for it that should be added to his list: the illness and
death of Ted Kennedy and the migration of Hillary Clinton out of the Senate and into Foggy Bottom, which deprived the debate of
what would have been its two dominant liberal protagonists. For Weiner, Clinton's absence and its implications carry a personal twist;
he is engaged to Huma Abedin, Hillary's longtime personal aide. ""It's a weird irony that I'm kind of part of the family now and this
has become my issue,"" Weiner says. ""If Hillary had stayed in the Senate, I would never have had this opening."" Weiner allows that
he's discussed the health-care battle with Clinton; what she's told him he will not say. But one imagines she approves of the
cleverness and chutzpa he's displayed—especially in drawing an explicit analogy between the public option and Medicare, an
equation that not only increases support for the proposal among voters but flushes out the phoniness of the Republican howls against a
""government takeover"" of health care. And one similarly imagines Madame Secretary's chagrin at watching the Obama White House
pursue a dance-of-the-seven-veils strategy explicitly designed to be the antithesis of the one she employed back in 1993 and
1994. Weiner's view of the administration's approach hasn't exactly been approving—a point he's made abundantly and consistently
clear over the past months. On the eve of Obama's September speech before a joint session of Congress, Weiner cracked that ""up to
now, the messaging from the White House has been done by Sybil ... They seem to have a different perspective on this every couple
of hours."" And he's apparently had no change of heart. ""The president has been a miserable messenger on this by and large,"" he tells
me.
Such criticisms haven't gone unnoticed at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, in no small part because Weiner—in a testament to his
consistency, lunacy, inability to shut up, or all three—hasn't shied away from making them directly. Indeed, on a recent flight back to
Washington from New York on Air Force One, I'm told by one congressman who witnessed the scene, Weiner got into a testy"
2975,FYI
2976,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, August 29, 2009 6:20 AM
H
Sullivan, Jacob J
Fw: Honduras Military Coup Decision
See WI - will call you later today to discuss my convs on this matter"
2977,Fyi
2978,Fyi
2979,FYI
2982,FYI
2984,"He can to anytime this morning before 1pm, or anytime tomorrow. (He is travelling after 1pm today)."
2986,"III suggest that and confirm with you. His ofl•fce said he would be available any time tomorrow, so I'm sure it'll be fine.
But I will check back and confirm."
2987,Fm moratinos just called for you. Wants to talk about honduras. I'm tracking down torn for an update for you.
2988,"Tom needs to update you before you talk to moratinos. So will connect torn to house, and then moratinos after? Ok?"
2989,"Back Tuesday
Speaking at UNESCO Monday with the new director on the unfinished Beijing agenda called to say she
wants to give us several million dollars to subsidize a fund to give an annual award for innovation in empowering women
that would be a rockefeller-State partnership. It would have a selection comm and we'd have to run all the traps, but
this could be huge. We could name after you if L would allow. I have to work oin this when I get back."
2990,Whoo hoo
2991,Fyi
2993,Will call you around 3pm
2994,"The confusing thing is that the list is organized differently in the schedule (alphabetical) and the briefing (in order of # of
troops contributed). It is the same ten countries."
2996,From esther
2998,"As I mentioned to you last night, lauren reports he can talk anytime after 1pm today. Or anytime tomorrow. U need to
let us know when."
2999,"Take a look —we are now eliminating Saturday but agenda is here:
Senior Leadership Retreat
Department of State
Blair House
October 2, 2009
Notional Timeline
8:00am: Continental Breakfast
8:15am: Welcome [HRC]
8:25am: Overview and Strategic Objectives for Retreat [CDM]
8:30am: Foreign Policy in the Obama Administration [HRC]
o priorities]
• Our Accomplishments To Date
o [HRC uses as opportunity to celebrate what has been
accomplished and call out areas for recognition -show
appreciation for work that has been done and set the tone of
appreciation, collaboration, team approach to success]
8:50am: Funding our Needs and Ambitions - State/USAID Budgets
• Presentation by Jack Lew [10 minutes]
o New Processes and Protocols for Implementing 2010
o Expectations for 2011
o Expectations for State/USAID approach
• Moderated Q and A by Lew with Greene, Smith, other appropriate
support [10 minutes]
9:25am: QDDR: Restoring Diplomacy/Elevating Development
• Introduction by Jack Lew [5 minutes]
• Presentation by Anne Marie Slaughter/Alonzo Fulgrum
[10 minutes]
• Moderated Questions and Answers [20 minutes]
o Lew to moderate discussion
o Alonzo/AMS/Jim Michel to field questions
o HRC field questions as approach in instances where she wants
to make or emphasize a point
10:05am: Seizing the Day - Immediate and Long-term Opportunities
• Intro of topic by CDM [5 min]:
1. What are 3 opportunities that State/USAID/MCC (or any
individually) have
2. How specifically would we implement each one
• Break out session - 30 minutes (4 groups of 17), with designated
staff member facilitator and note-taker
10:45am Coffee Break
11:00am Traditional Threat: Security Peace in the Middle East
• Introduction by HRC [5 min: praise/validation for team]
• Presentation by George Mitchell [10 minutes]
• Moderated [Mara Rudman] Questions and Answers [15 min]
o recognize Mitchell team to permit them to respond to
questions with George
11:30am Transnational Threat: Non-Proliferation (or alternatives below)
• Introduction by HRC [5 min: praise/validation for team]
• Presentation by Ellen Tauscher [other options: climate change,
energy security, global health, others]
• Moderated [TBD] Questions and Answers [15 minutes]
o recognize T team to permit them to respond to questions with
Ellen
12:15: Lunch
• Introduction by CDM [5 min]
• 21st Century State Craft - Alec Ross [10 min]
• [No Q/A or Q/A]
1:15pm Partnering for Success - Paradigms and Pitfalls
• Introduction by: TBD [5 min]
• Breakout into 4 Groups of 17 with facilitator and note-taker [40 min]
• Whole of State/USAID/MCC Approach
• Partnering and Leading Through the Interagency
• Regional and Functional Bureaus - Ensuring Connections
• In-Country USG Coordination - the Art of the Possible?
2:00pm
2:30pm
Traditional Threat: Iran is Not Ten Feet Tall
• Introduction by HRC [5 min: praise/validation for team]
• Presentation by Bill Burns [10 min] [other options: Af/Pak, North
Korea, Iraq]
• Moderated [by Jeff Feltman] Questions and Answers [15 minutes]
o recognize Iran team to permit them to respond to questions
with Bill
Transnational Threat: Health in a Global Age [alternatives b/l]
• Introduction by HRC [5 min: praise/validation for team]
• Presentation by TBD/USAID [10 min] [other options: climate
change, energy security, others]
• Moderated [TBD] Questions and Answers [15 minutes]
o recognize team to permit them to respond to questions with
presenter
3:00pm Coffee Break
3:15pm Traditional Threat: North Korea - Moving Forward or Not?
• Introduction by HRC [5 min: praise/validation for team]
• Presentation by Jim Steinberg [10 min] [other option: Iraq]
• Moderated [by Kurt Campbell/Phil Goldberg] Questions and Answers
[15 minutes]
o recognize North Korea team to permit them to respond to
questions with Jim
3:45pm: Presentation of Working Group Findings
• Presentation by Group Facilitator (or Other) of Lessons and Best
Practices [5 min per group]
o Whole of State/USAID/MCC
o Partnering and Leading Through the Interagency
o Regional and Functional Bureaus - Ensuring Connections
o In-Country USG Coordination - the Art of the Possible?
• Q/A Moderated by CDM [15 min]
4:20pm Working Group Presentations of the Opportunities Ahead
• Presentation by Group Facilitator (or Other) of Opportunities and
Actions Needed [5 min per group]
• Q/A Moderated by CDM [15 min]
5:10pm: The Challenges on the Horizon [HRC]
• HRC expresses appreciation for work done today
• Outlines the Challenges Ahead
• Seeks Investment and Commits to Follow-Up
• Invites Participants and Partners to Whitehaven at 7:30pm
5:30pm: Retreat Concludes until Dinner
7:30pm Dinner at Whitehaven Residence
Staff and Partner/Spouses invited
Buffet Dinner - No formal remarks"
3000,FYI
3002,Independent Fact-Finding Committee>
3003,"No he's not available after 1pm today. He is only avail before 1pm. I'm waiting to hear bk from his office about
tomorrow morning"
3006,"1. he's coming entire day now.
2. okay"
3007,FYI
3008,Fyi
3009,"Got it.
Sending you shortly the current list of invitees — take a quick look and make sure no one is missing."
3010,"I'm back, just waiting for elevator.
Let me know if you need notes."
3011,Donilon can do 730 am tomorrow. III work with huma to sort out logistics.
3012,"Lona
Daniel Yohannes will be in town on Tuesday. Not sure how hectic HRC's day is but would be good to have her get 30
minutes with him. I am going to schedule 30 minutes with him so she can either join or we can tack time on the
backend.
In addition, I am going to connect Steve and Daniel so they can meet in person on Tuesday — I likely will coordinate that
so that Steve joins before or after I meet with Daniel in case HRC wants to see both.
cdm"
3013,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, August 29, 2009 12:06 PM
H
Fw: Truck bombs kill 16 people in Iraq (AP)"
3014,"Great, will coordinate with Joanne."
3015,We'll follow up.
3016,"Will do. I haven't seen the
Schwarzenegger conference but let me double check Monday morning.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
(202) 647-9071"
3017,"Thought they were just right. 67 and Jerusalem for Pals. Jewish state and no preconditions for Bibi. Now, both parties can say they
got what they need, which hopefully creates some space to begin negotiations. Sandy
This is written from my BlackBerry."
3018,FYI
3019,"FYI
B6"
3020,"U asked who he met with today:
Montenegrin Prime Minister Djukanovic
Croatian Foreign Minister Jandrokovic
Cypriot FM Kyprianou
Serbian Foreign Minister Jeremic
Swedish Foreign Minister Bildt
Bosnian President Silajdzic
Macedonian President Ivanov"
3021,Fyi
3022,I got the invite for she schwarzenegger conf last night. Its in calif from sept 29-oct 2nd. III get info to both of u
3023,"Barack Obama snubs Gordon Brown over private
talks
White House spurned five requests from PM's aides for bilateral meeting
Gordon Brown and Barack Obama at a joint news conference at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in
London in April 2009. Photograph: Jason Reed/Reufers
Gordon Brown lurched from being hailed as a global statesman to intense embarrassment tonight, after it
emerged US President Barack Obama had turned down no fewer than five requests from Downing Street to
hold a bilateral meeting at the United Na tions in New York or at the G20 summit starting in Pittsburgh today.
The prime minister, eager to portray himself as a leading player on the international stage in America this week,
was also forced to play down suggestions from inside his own party that he might step down early, either due to
ill health or deteriorating eyesight.
There have been tensions between the White House and No 10 for weeks over Brown's handling of the Scottish
government's decision to release the man convicted of the Lockerbie bombing, Abdelbaset al-Megrahi.
Brown's efforts to secure a prestigious primetime slot for his keynote speech at the general assembly in New
York were also thwarted when the Libyan leader, Colonel Gaddafi, delivered a 100-minute speech to the UN,
massively running over Brown's 15 minute slot.
Brown had not only been seeking a bilateral meeting with Obama, but feelers were also sent out to hold a joint
press conference, an event that would have boosted Brown's efforts to offer himself as a linchpin of
international diplomacy. Government sources said that Britain even changed its policy on swine flu
immunisation in Africa to match that of the Obama administration last week, in an attempt to rebuild relations.
No 10 denied there had been any hint of a snub, saying Obama and Brown had plenty of chances to talk as they
sat next to one another at the summits. They insisted they were working closely on issues such as future
economic regulation, bankers' bonuses, nuclear non-proliferation and climate change. Brown himself insisted: ""I
do say that the special relationship is strong, it continues to strengthen.""
But Obama has held bilateral meetings in New York with the Chinese president, Hu Jintao, the Russian
president, Dmitry Medvedev, and the new Japanese prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama.
News of the five spurned approaches compounded a miserable day for Brown at home which saw a
parliamentary aide resign over the prime minister's refusal to sack Lady Scotland, the attorney general, after she
was fined £5,000 for employing an illegal immigrant, as well as a withering attack by the former home secretary
Charles Clarke.
Stephen Hesford, Labour MP for Wirral West, told Brown in a resignation letter: ""In my view, the facts of the
case do not matter. It is the principle which counts, particularly at a time when the public's trust of Whitehall is
uncertain to say the least. We have to be seen to be accountable.""
Brown was also savaged by Charles Clarke, who told the Evening Standard that in his view Brown's leadership
risked letting ""the whole Labour ship crash on to the rocks of May 2010 [the expected date of the general
election] and sink for a very long time"". He said he hoped rumours that Brown would quit would come true. ""I
think his own dignity ought to look to that kind of solution.""
In two interviews , Brown was forced for the first time to field questions about his health. ""My sight is not at all
deteriorating,"" he told NBC.
Asked on BBC Radio 5 Live whether he might quit for health reasons, the prime minister replied: ""I am healthy
and I am very fit. I run a lot to keep fit and I will continue to keep fit.
""I keep going. I have got a job to do. I have got work to do. We have got to meet this challenge.""
In his own speech to the UN, Obama promised an end to the unilateralism marked by the previous Bush
administration, an approach that saw US and Britain working in tandem. In remarks that suggest Obama will
focus on broadening American alliances across the globe, he said: ""The time has come for the world to move in
a new direction ... a new era of engagement based on mutual interest and mutual respect.""
Last week, the White House had unusually briefed that Obama had told B rown in a phone conversation that he
disapproved of the release of the Lockerbie bomber on compassionate grounds, something No 10 had not
highlighted. Megrahi was released on the basis that he had three months to live, and then received a hero's
welcome as he returned to Tripoli.
Brown had said he respected the release, but insisted undertakings by the Libyans that the return would be low-
key had been broken.
In an attempt to distance himself from the Libyans, Brown moved to toughen his position against Colonel
Gaddafi after Libya's leader theatrically tore up the UN charter in his address. Gaddafi said the security council
should be renamed ""the terror council"".
Brown countered in his speech in New York later: ""I am here to reaffirm the UN charter, not to tear it up. I call
on everyone to support its universal principles.""
He urged world leaders to recognise that the next six months presented tests on climate change and terrorism
that were as huge as the banking crisis. On climate change he said: ""If we miss this opportunity to protect our
planet, we cannot hope for a second chance some time in the future. There will be no retrospective global
agreement to undo the damage we have caused. This is the moment now to limit and reverse climate change we
are inflicting on future generations.""
He added: ""If the poorest and most vulnerable are going to be able to adapt, if the emerging economies are
going to embark on low-carbon development paths, if the forest nations are going to slow and stop
deforestation, then the richer countries must contribute financially.""
No 10 again denied that the prime minister had been snubbed last night. A spokesman said the stories were
""without foundation. As we have said throughout the week, the prime minister and President Obama are having
a number of meetings throughout the week. These included a wide-ranging discussion following last night's
climate change dinner. They will also be co-chairing an important meeting on Thursday on Pakistan and the
fight against terrorism. As the prime minister has already said, there will be further meetings at the G20 summit
in Pittsburgh."""
3024,Fyi
3025,"Barack Obama rebuffs Gordon Brown as 'special
relationship' sinks to new low
Gordon Brown has been snubbed repeatedly by Barack Obama
during his trip to the United States, as the fall-out from the release of
the Lockerbie bomber appeared to have left ""the special relationship""
at its lowest ebb for nearly 20 years.
By Andrew Porter, Political Editor in New York
Published: 11:49PM BST 23 Sep 2009
British officials made five attempts to secure official talks with the US President and even agreed to a policy
change in an attempt to land a joint appearance between the two leaders, said diplomatic sources.
But the White House rebuffed the offers and Mr Brown, who had hoped to increase his popularity by appearing
on his own with Mr Obama, had to settle instead for a snatched conversation with the President in a New York
kitchen.
The setbacks led to fears that relati ons between Downing Street and the White House were at their lowest point
since John Major's frosty dealings with Bill Clinton.
It was disclosed earlier this week that Mr Brown would not hold bilateral talks with Mr Obama, despite the
President hosting individual meetings with the leaders of Japan, China and Russia. Downing Street claimed that
this was not unusual.
However, a British diplomat told The Daily Telegraph that the White House's refusal to meet Mr Brown had
been a serious embarrassment for the Prime Minister.
""It is wrong for people to say that we have been relaxed about the way things have gone,"" the source said.
""There were five attempts to set up a meeting and none have come off.""
The most striking example of Downing Street's desperation to engineer a meeting was a change of policy on
supplying swine flu vaccines to Africa. It aimed to match America's commitment and was announced last week.
As a result, it had been hoped that Mr Obama would agree to a joint press conference, according to a senior
source. However, the meeting never happened.
The White House said that Mr Brown and Mr Obama would chair a meeting tonight about Pakistan, and would
""spend all day Friday together."" However, Friday's meeting in Pittsburgh involves the full G20 group of world
leaders.
The release=2 Oof the Lockerbie bomber, Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al Megrahi, appears to have been behind the
new chill in relations between Washington and London.
Mr Obama expressed his dismay at the release in a telephone call with the Prime Minister earlier this month.
Downing Street's original account of the conversation failed to refer to the President's anger.
Mr Brown has maintained that freeing the Libyan was a matter entirely for the Scottish executive.
Nearly 200 Americans died when Pan Am flight 103 was blown up over Scotland in 1988. Yesterday, families
of victims protested at the UN in New York where Mr Brown and Libya's leader, Col Muammar Gaddafi, made
speeches.
Last night Downing Street played down suggestions of a rift with the White House and pointed to an informal
discussion that Mr Brown had with Mr Obama after a climate change dinner at the UN on Tuesday night. The
15-minute ""walk and chat"" took place in a kitchen of the UN headquarters as both men left the building in
Manhattan.
No 10 maintained that there was nothing unusual in the Prime Minister not holding a separate ""bilateral""
meeting with the President. There was little doubt that Mr Brown would have relished a high profile meeting
with Mr Obama.
In a speech to the United Nations, Mr Obama said the world must ""move in a new direction"" and ""embrace20a
new era of engagement"". That was seen as a sign that the President was more likely to place emphasis on
relations with a wide range of countries rather than rely on old alliances. Mr Brown's increasingly poor
relationship with the White House contrasts sharply with that of his predecessor Tony Blair, who enjoyed close
friendships with both Mr Clinton and George W Bush.
John Major's Tory government had difficulty with Mr Clinton, however, because of claims that Mr Major had
tried to help George Bush Snr's re-election campaign in 1992 by allowing researchers to dig into Mr Clinton's
student past at Oxford — something Sir John has always denied.
Mr Brown, whose plans for a lunchtime speech to the United Nations were derailed after Col Gaddafi spoke for
96 minutes, faced attacks on several fronts yesterday.
Kathy Tedeschi and Sue Kosmowski, Americans who lost husbands in the Lockerbie bombing, travelled to
New York to protest outside the UN headquarters. They claimed that Mr Brown had put trade interests ahead of
justice for victims families.
The Prime Minister was also accused of trying to appease Iran by ignoring the supression of opposition in order
to safeguard talks on its nuclear programme.
Shirin Ebadi, Iran's only Nobel Peace Prize winner, said the West cared more about its own securit y than
human rights.
Mr Brown was criticised for failing to stay at a dinner where he was honoured as Statesman of the Year. Guests
paid $1,000 to attend the function attended by, among others, Henry Kissinger and the pop star Bono."
3026,"Yes, Thursday's PC is scheduled to end at 6pm so the 7pm shuttle. With regard to Wednesday, I have reached out to the
WH about and will be sure to report back as soon as they suggest a time.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
(202) 647-9071"
3027,Fyi
3028,Ok.
3029,Ok
3030,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, August 29, 2009 4:57 PM
H
Fw: (Nytimes) U.S. Accuses Pakistan of Altering Missiles
B6"
3031,"For oprah, Monday is better. rm going to confirm for chappaqua monday.
Oscar, can u make sure she sees this?
327"
3032,"The best option for ban for the food security meeting is saturday afternoon at 4pm. Cheryl wants to confirm. U ok if I
move forward?"
3033,Fyi
3034,Fyi
3035,"Lisa ling.
She's an oprah correspondant. we can do late monday afternoon so u don't have to be rushed getting out of here.
Maybe offer her 3 or 4pm?
Will get a makeup person."
3036,"The dates are tomorrow or monday.
Not next week. Its why I asked cheryl to discuss with you because it meant interrupting your vacation which I wasn't
prepared to do."
3037,"Checking
I am sure they will
Mitchell just responded. He can talk before 10:30 tonite or before noon tomorrow. What do u want to do?"
3038,"He's not calling you. Gave us windows he's available but does want to get a time so he's at a landline.
Oprah can do monday in the hamptons. You could just use house. Its close and will have good spaces to use."
3039,Can we set up turkish fm call tomorrow?
3040,"Will update in your rolodex here, too.
B6
Lau.ren. Jiloty
Special Assistant to
Secretary Hillary Rodham Clinton
JilotyLC@state.gov
148"
3041,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, August 30, 2009 9:51 AM
H
Fw: Turkey-Armenia text for Davutoglu call
Phils response to delaying call tomorrow?
Would u like to do today?
Or jim can do today and u can follow up tomorrow?"
3043,"He can do 1:30
He's traveling in slovenia"
3044,"Not yet cause I'm sure it will be fine
Oprahs people haven't confirmed they can do it in hamptons yet As soon as they do, I will call her"
3045,I left u final call sheet last night on kitchen counter. Do u need another copy?
3046,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, August 30, 2009 1:02 PM
H
Re: Turkey-Armenia text for Davutoglu call
B6"
3047,Ahmet
3049,They r standing by
3051,"Phil is
GordonPH@state.gov"
3052,"Oprah just confirmed.
So we can do the following
- 9am kouchner call
- 9:30am Jones call
- 10am jack and cheryl call
- press briefing call for oprah
- will have hair and makeup come to house around 11.
- interview at lisa at around 12:30 or 1. Does that work? We can start whole daye later too."
3053,"Holbrooke's Contributions on Af/Pak
Holbrooke has assembled an unprecedented interagency team to carry out the work on
Af/Pak — a whole-of-government team in DC and a reorganized and reenergized U.S.
mission in Kabul.
Holbrooke's team is actually getting things done, including the implementation of more
than 20 detailed action plans. Some examples of the work thus far:
• The civilian surge in Afghanistan is on pace to meet targets by end of year.
• Our approach to assistance in Afghanistan has changed dramatically, both through the
consolidation of efforts under Tony Wayne and the review (and sometimes rejection) of
assistance contracts.
•
• Holbrooke has opened and is actively pursuing R/R channels.
• The swift and comprehensive U.S. response helped alleviate and reduce the impact of the
Swat refugee crisis.
•
• The trilateral meetings have helped create conditions for progress on key cross-border
issues.
)11
• Holbrooke's international diplomacy — in the Gulf, with China, with the cadre of other
special representatives — has translated into funding and equipment commitments, more
buy-in, and more patience.
Holbrooke has been a key driver of (non-military) strategic innovation in Afghanistan and
Pakistan. Here are some examples:Ill
Defining a regional approach to Af/Pak (including trilateral summits)
• The regional approach championed by Holbrooke became a central feature of the Reidel
report; the trilats are a pure Holbrooke invention
Afghanistan
The clearest voice and thinker on swifter and more heavily resourced ""Afghanization"" -
primarily by standing up a sufficiently large and sufficiently capable ANSF — as the preferable
alternative to adding more troops.
• The Reidel report calls for training 134,000 army and 82,000 police over two years;
Holbrooke is working through a strategy that would more than double those numbers and
speed the pace of training. Such a strategy has to resolve significant obstacles,
particularly with respect to the police.
Framing and executing the U.S. approach to Afghan elections:
•
Developing a strategy — in partnership with the Afghan government and others — for pursuing
reconciliation/reintegration.
• The Reidel report discusses support for the Afghan government's efforts to reintegrate
""non ideologically-committed"" insurgents who lay down their arms, renounce al Qaeda,
and accept the Afghan Constitution. Holbrooke was key in developing this aspect of the
report, and is now working through the next phases.
Prioritizing a shift in emphasis on counternarcotics from eradication to interdiction
• The Reidel report discusses the need for increased interdiction efforts — and the attendant
need to support licit agriculture to shift livelihoods.
Emphasizing and executing our engagement with Arab allies, China, and Turkey
• The Reidel report speaks generally about engaging all those with a stake in the region. It
does not lay out a specific diplomatic strategy or priority countries.
• [NOTE:
• This issue does not get extensive treatment in the Reidel report.
Pakistan
• The Reidel report does not speak in any detail to this issue.
Responding decisively to the refugee crisis in Swat and Buner
• Obviously, the Reidel report does not address this. The immediate response to the
refugee crisis was Holbrooke's team at its finest.
Making the image of the United States in Pakistan as a critical strategic priority
• The Reidel report focuses on strategic communications in Afghanistan. Holbrooke's
recent trip with Judith McHale is the latest in an ongoing effort to develop a strategic
communications plan for Pakistan. Generally, Holbrooke, along with McDonough, has
been the key mover on all things related to strategic communications in both Afghanistan
and Pakistan; he has a good sense of what is missing and what is needed.
Pursuing a major new energy initiative to address Pakistan's economic troubles and boost
support for the United States
• The Reidel report mentions energy as a key sector where we should be encouraging
foreign investment.
1. References/comparisons to the Reidel report are in italics below each item"
3055,"Cheryl is not ready for a secure call yet.
174"
3056,"8:30am call with mitchell
9am secure call with jack and cdm to follow 9:30am call with jones 10am call with kouchner Hairdresser coming at
11am We will do a call with melane and pir and I am getting paper for oprah interview.
.an"
3057,"At bottom is the People op-ed. I just checked and ironically the figure comes from Melanne's testimony during an SFRC
hearing, where she stated: """"The scale and enormity of the violence directed at women [in the DRCI can scarcely be
adequately described. Some 1100 rapes are being reported each month, with an average of 36 women and girls raped
every day."". Triple checking the origins.
Hillary Clinton Pledges to 'Banish Sexual Violence'
Originally posted Friday August 21, 2009 12:30 PM EDT
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton may be taking some well-earned R&R in Bermuda this week, but last week, the former
First Lady and U.S. Senator wrapped up a grueling seven-nation diplomatic mission to Africa.
While much was made back home about her snapping at a Congolese student who asked her about Bill Clinton's
thoughts on a trade issue (""My husband is not the secretary of state, I am,"" she retorted), the emotional heart of her
tour was also her most dangerous stop — in Goma, inside the war zone in eastern Congo, where she tearfully met rape
victims on Aug. 11.In this exclusive Op-Ed piece for PEOPLE.com, Secretary Clinton shares what she learned on her visit -
and what she will do about it.
What I Saw in Goma
By Hillary Rodham Clinton
In 11 days of travel across Africa, I saw humanity at its worst — and at its best. In Goma last week, I saw both.
The Mugunga Internally Displaced Persons Camp sits in a land of volcanoes and great lakes on the edge of Goma, a
provincial capital in the eastern Congo. The camp is now home to 18,000 people seeking refuge from a cycle of violent
conflict that has left 5.4 million dead since 1998. Chased from their homes and villages by armed rebels and informal
militias, these men, women and children walked for miles with little food or water until they reached this relatively safe
haven.
Now they live in tents, one next to the other, row after row, some clinging to life, others hanging on to whatever
glimmer of hope remains in a region plagued by years of brutality. Many of these people have been robbed of their
homes, possessions, families and, worst of all, their dignity.
Women and girls in particular have been victimized on an unimaginable scale, as sexual and gender-based violence has
become a tactic of war and has reached epidemic proportions. Some 1,100 rapes are reported each month, with an
average of 36 women and girls raped every day.
I visited a hospital run by the organization Heal Africa and met a woman who told me that she was eight months'
pregnant when she was attacked. She was at home when a group of men broke in. They took her husband and two of
their children and shot them in the front yard, before returning into the house to shoot her other two children. Then
they beat and gang-raped her and left her for dead. But she wasn't dead. She fought for life and her neighbors managed
to get her to the hospital — 85 kilometers away.
I came to Goma to send a clear message: The United States condemns these attacks and all those who commit them and
abet them. They are crimes against humanity.
These acts don't just harm a single individual, or a single family, or village, or group. They shred the fabric that weaves us
together as human beings. Such atrocities have no place in any society. This truly is humanity at its worst.
But there is reason to hope. We have seen survivors summon the courage to rebuild their lives and their communities.
We have seen civic leaders and organizations come together to combat this appalling scourge. And we have seen health
care workers sacrifice comfortable careers so they can treat the wounded
in Goma, I met doctors and advocates who work every day to repair the broken bodies and spirits of women who have
been raped, often by gangs, and often in such brutal fashion that they can no longer bear children, or walk or work.
Caregivers like Lyn Lusi, who founded Heal Africa in Goma, and Dr. Denis Mukwege, who founded the Panzi hospital in
Bukavu, represent humanity at its best.
The United States will stand with these brave people. This week I announced more than $17 million in new funding to
prevent and respond to gender and sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo. We will provide medical care,
counseling, economic assistance and legal support. We will dedicate nearly $3 million to recruit and train police officers
to protect women and girls and to investigate sexual violence. We will send technology experts to help women and
front-line workers report abuse using photographs and video and share information on treatment and legal options. And
we will deploy a team of civilian experts, medical personnel and military engineers to assess how we can further assist
survivors of sexual violence.
While I was in the DRC, I had very frank discussions about sexual violence with President Kabila. I stressed that the
perpetrators of these crimes, no matter who they are, must be prosecuted and punished. This is particularly important
when they are in positions of authority, including members of the Congolese military, who have been allowed to commit
these crimes with impunity.
Our commitment to survivors of sexual and gender-based violence did not begin with my visit to Goma, and it will not
end with my departure.
We are redoubling our efforts to address the fundamental cause of this violence: the fighting that goes on and on in the
eastern Congo. We will be taking additional steps at the United Nations and in concert with other nations to bring an
end to this conflict.
There is an old Congolese proverb that says, ""No matter how long the night, the day is sure to come."" The day must
come when the women of the eastern Congo can walk freely again, to tend their fields, play with their children and
collect firewood and water without fear. They live in a region of unrivaled natural beauty and rich resources. They are
strong and resilient. They could, if given the opportunity, drive economic and social progress that would make their
country both peaceful and prosperous.
Working together, we will banish sexual violence into the dark past, where it belongs, and help the Congolese people
seize the opportunities of a new day."
3058,"To state the very obvious, you are not only speaking as the Secretary of State, but as a mother to an audience of
mothers
---"
3059,"B6
Judiths best number
.zol"
3060,"To close the loop: the 1,100/month statistic comes from a UNICEF report and is widely accepted/used"
3061,"Susan rice would rather meet with you thurs So no call needed today
WWI"
3062,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Monday, August 31, 2009 12:54 PM
H
B6"
3063,"Tom harkin called office twice during
Cell:
Home:
AM"
3064,"Cc: Oscar Flores
Senator kerry asking to talk.
As you know he is overseas. He's available this am. ops can connect whevenver u call in."
3065,Jim steinberg asking to talk to you. He's at his office till 4 and then on cell. Ops can track him down whenever u r ready.
3066,"I've had wonderfully constructive conversations with him and we've got, what we both think is a terrific plan, but he
really needs to present it to you. Once we have your feedback, we can move on all of this. It's all very exciting and he's
the best.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
3067,"I have been trying, but the first feedback I got was maybe he should meet with Cheryl, et al. Frankly, he is following up
on his last conversation with you so we should just all get together with you. I will get with Lona today.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
3068,Potus may call through ops b/w 1 and 6 pm
3069,"There are 2 draft letters from mara being faxed to secure fax right now. Oscar will receive.
Also, norwegian fm stoere wants to talk tomorrow. He will be in aghanistan."
3071,"RELEASE IN PART
B6"
3072,Mitchell says he needs to talk asap.
3073,Holbrooke and eikenberry asking if you can do a conference call with them.
3074,Fyi
3075,Fyi
3076,"Ok its now going to be:
Ambassadors Eikenberry, Ricciardone, and tim Carney who's are all at embassy kabul."
3077,Yes
3078,They will.
3079,Kerry is sleeping
3080,"I'm reading an old Entertainment Weekly and came across a promotional photo of Hope Davis and Dennis Quaid as you
and President Clinton (along with Michael Sheen and Helen McCrory as the Blairs), for the HBO movie called ""The Special
Relationship"" (due in the spring) - thought you'd get a kick out of seeing a photo of the photo, attached
In the caption, Hope Davis says, ""They made special teeth for me because Hillary's are very unique. When I popped
them in, I suddenly looked very much like her."""
3081,"Per my prior email
Cdm"
3084,Sounds good -- will have copies for you tomorrow morning of those schedules.
3085,"See below. Will send PIR comments shortly.
To: CDM
Fr: Caitlin
Re: Branch Book
Overview:
There are few surprises in this book. The ""surprises"" that might exist are buried and took a close reading to pick
up on—the two main ones are about the terror clause of WJC's crime bill and why he hadn't disclosed
information about Lewinsky (because he hadn't wanted to become a witness against her). There are a lot of
things that have been covered in My Life and other publications. Quite honestly the book was pretty boring and
much more focused on Branch than I had anticipated. While not as ""and this day, and the next day"" as My Life,
it does share many of the same elements that would engage only a true Clinton fanatic or historian. The fact that
there appears to be no index also makes it difficult for anyone looking for a quick hit to get one. Furthermore,
WJC's words are so interlaced with Branch's recollection through his dictations, that the number of direct WJC
quotes was far fewer than I had expected.
HRC was not as much of a player as one might imagine. Her role is largely seen through her interactions with
Branch when he is recording WJC. Her statements were consistent with the past, with the exception of the
Gephardt comment, and didn't grab much attention at all.Ell (Others included HRC's devotion to CVC, thought
that there should not be a special prosecutor and images of her returning from meetings. They were pretty much
aligned with her interactions with Branch.) Surprisingly, or not surprisingly, many of the problems discussed in
the book are those, which face the current Administration—Middle East peace, North Korea, China, etc...
Branch repeatedly injects his feelings on specific subjects and seems to use the book to voice his own opinion
of the Administration and events of the time. He clearly has topics he prefers over others (for example his
connection with the events in Haiti result in a lot of discussion about it), but there are some subjects that are
strikingly sparsely discussed such as Rwanda. Its absence from long discussions was surprising, but it did not
appear as thought WJC ever-dodged questions about the topic, they just weren't addressed. Much like My Life,
one theme that repeated itself was WJC's conflict with and disdain for the media, especially long passages
about NYT and Washington Post. There are a few instances where gives them credit on their reporting, but you
would be hard-pressed to find them. Additionally, there are numerous mentions of WJC's acute allergies and his
chronic fatigue, with imagery of him falling asleep in sessions on more than a couple occasions.
The book has quite a bit on Whitewater, but given the dearth of public documentation there is little that Branch
could write that hadn't been said. One thing I had not recalled was the D'Amato's subpoena of CVC's friends,
later quashed, who slept over while HRC's Rose Law Firm records were in the White House. Branch does
portray a helpful distinction in how WJC looked at Whitewater and other scandals. While WJC attacks
Whitewater as a political hunt, Branch does have him WJC saying that Filegate needed to be separated from
Whitewater, because this was a legitimate inquiry. There are some quips that could catch someone's eye, such
as WJC referring to Paula Jones as ""a 'new bimbo' he [WJC] didn't even recognize.""
Branch does not dwell on Lewinsky or the impeachment. With the exception of Bruce, Bennett and Kendall, no
other lawyers are mentioned. There is one passage that I am looking into, in which WJC says part of the reason
he didn't mention his relationship with Lewinsky at first was because she was being threatened with jail time if
she was found to be lying under oath and had he told the truth he could become a witness against her. This is a
very small passage that could easily be missed, but one that it is important to note as I don't recall hearing this
before. (This is addressed more fully below.)
There are a few relationships that track through the book more than others. They include WJC's relationship
with Gore, which maps in part because it is not a focal point until the end, and his contentious relationship with
Janet Reno. The one Senator that appears to be most discussed negatively is Moynihan. All three of these issues
are discussed in turn below. WJC is portrayed as an extremely loving and attentive father and HRC is portrayed
in a much more human light than other books/articles covering this time period, with ample mention of her
relationship with CVC and images of affection between her and WJC, both pre- and post-impeachment.
On foreign relations there is a lot of time spent discussing the Middle East, Northern Ireland, the Balkans,
China, Russia, Pakistan/India and in the beginning of the book, Haiti. (Note: Much of what is written about
Haiti is about Branch's own experience there and on the subject.) There is also a fair amount of discussion
about North Korea, but nothing that has not been discussed in the past few weeks. Bin Laden is discussed in
what seems to track mention of him in My Life, which seems to have more detail and background than this
book.
In certain cases there is more detail here than in My Life, for example on his trip to Pakistan WJC wrote that the
USSS cancelled one stop because they would be ""defenseless"" flying in, whereas Brach writes that the streets
would be lined with ""assassins."" There are candid looks at WJC's take on certain people and the relationship
between some, such as Albright and Berger's dislike of Holbrooke, and a more detailed depiction of Yeltsin's
drinking, such as yelling outside of Blair House for a cab to get pizza.
One thing to note, is that often times WJC seems to be speaking to Branch intentionally without the recorders
going, but Branch writes about those interactions and exchanges nonetheless. Such is the case with HRC's
Gephardt comment.
The following items are addressed in the memo:
Wen Ho Lee and Terror Clause of Crime Bill 4
WJC and Lewinsky's Silence 4
HRC and Kissinger 4
HRC and gay/lesbian 5
Tension with Moynihan 5
HRC as World Player 5
Jesse Jackson 6
Tension with Janet Reno 6
Portrayal of Carter 7
Relationship with Gore 8
Other (This includes: Maggie recommending Panetta, HRC and Haiti Invasion, ITAV co-author flap,
Subpoenas of CVC's Friends, Vernon Jordan on Extramarital Sex, Gore/HRC ticket, WJC suggesting Rubin run
for Senate, Trip to South Asia) 11
Wen Ho Lee and Terror Clause of Crime Bill
In discussing Wen Ho Lee's release Branch characterizes WJC's lack of knowledge about the strained
interpretation of the anti-terrorist provisions in the crime bill and arbitrary detentions as a ""confession."" My Life
only mentions Lee's accusation in passing and does not again discuss Lee. Below are two passages from
Branch's book the first giving context and the second about the Terror Clause of the Crime Bill.
➢ The year closed on spies and terrorism. The Justice Department, after fierce debate among the security
agencies, indicted nuclear scientist Wen Ho Lee on fifty-nine counts of copying classified material to his
personal computer. Lee was being handled like a radioactive espionage defendant—no bail, lockdown,
solitary confinement—even though the long dragnet had produced no evidence that he offered secrets to
China or anyone else. The president said experts were telling him the worst spies sometimes stored their
treason for a rainy day. This sounded fishy to me. Clinton shrugged. Nothing would please him more
than to establish Lee's innocence. [Branch, 577]
➢ While Lee was indicted, Branch writes that WJC noted that others ""were being held in secret, uncharged
and untried...He [WJC] was embarrassed not to have sponsored this measure into law without
foreseeing such arbitrary detentions...Under the terrorist act, any prosecutor should decide within the
legal limit...whether to bring charges on the testimony of a secret informant or otherwise. To his
dismay, Clinton had learned of defendants held incommunicado for more than six months. One extreme
detention had last three years. 'I think it's wrong,' he [WJC] said. 'It's not American. We accept guilty
people on the street to enjoy and protect our freedom.' [Branch, 629]
WJC and Lewinsky's Silence
Branch writes that part of WJC's motive for not discussing what had happened with Lewinsky was that it could
send her to jail, as she had denied it.
➢ ""Also, he pointed out that Starr had been threatening to jail Lewinsky all year over her sworn denial of
the affair. If Clinton had come forward with anything at all about their relationship, he said Starr could
have turned him into a witness against Lewinsky, betraying her discreet silence. Such subtleties, while
original, struck me as tendentious. The president never claimed chivalry as the real motive for his
steadfast denial, nor did he dispute the essential truth of Lewinsky's account."" [Branch, 511]
HRC and Kissinger
The following could be fodder for people who want to continue to string along the notion of channeling Eleanor
Roosevelt.
➢ There is a passage in which HRC describes an exchange she had with Kissinger at a dinner where he
complained that if the health care bill passed he wouldn't be able to see his own doctor. She continued to
say ""it was interesting, in fact, that she had dreamed about Kissinger only a few nights before. His
visage turned suddenly effervescent at a banquet, announcing gladly that his worries were over because
the Clinton health care bill was dying. 'Oh, no, Dr. Kissinger,' she replied coolly. 'Don't be sure that it's
dead. We'll keep fighting, and there's always light at the end of the tunnel.' She said Kissing blanched,
speechless at her deft reminder of the Vietnam War...Now at last, in Hillary's dream, it registered that
his strategic designs had spewed carnage and venom for seven needless years...'That's what I dreamed,'
Hillary repeated, lost in thought. 'You know, I always get my revenge in dreams, but never in real life.'
[Branch, 179]
HRC and gay/lesbian
Writing about a call with HRC from NYS, Branch recalls how WJC's counsel got very ""exercised."" WJC left
the room. ""He was subdued on his return. 'You know, I've had a lot more contact with gay people in my life
than Hillary.' He sighed. Her temperament had a conservative, religious core, formed before homosexual issues
were even mentionable. New York politics was a tough crucible, and she was unsure what heat she could take.
On the other hand, personal experience could speed adaptation."" [Branch, 551]
Tension with Moynihan
There are several occasions throughout the book that Branch recalls WJC's grievances and frustration with
Moynihan. For example:
> When Moynihan called for the international arms embargo to be unilaterally lifted so that Bosnia could
fight for themselves, Branch writes, ""The president flinched when I mentioned [it]...'That's just a
freebie for him,' snapped Clinton, 'and he knows it.'"" [p.140]
> In regard to health care: ""Echoing comments by Hillary at dinner, he [WJC] faulted Senator Moynihan
for aimless hearings conducted without a strategy or theme."" [p.170]
➢ Discussing Independent Counsel: ""She [HRC] was especially scornful of the Democrats, and quoted a
number of them. Senator Moynihan, for instance, publicly said the Clintons were nice people and he was
sure they had nothing to hide. 'Why not have an investigation?' he often asked. She said Moynihan
skated blithely on the surface, never produced results in Congress, and could not withstand such scrutiny
himself for five minutes, living in an apartment secured through his chairmanship of the Pennsylvania
Avenue Development Corporation."" [Brach, 182]
➢ ""Donnybrook"" argument in which Moynihan said of a fundraising speech WJC gave citing a regretted
hypothetical about a controversial decision. Moynihan told the press, ""He doesn't understand...that he's
conceding the principles."" WJC confronted him about lack of context given to the statement to the press
and said that Moynihan knew what he was doing by ""feeding the beast of hostile presumption about
Clinton's motives."" [Branch, 299]
HRC as World Player
There are several images as HRC as a player on the world stage, both with WJC and on her own. Several
examples follow:
➢ Middle East: Discussing peace with King Hussein: ""They had retreated for lunch as two couples—the
Clintons, with the king and his wife, Queen Noor—in the family dining room... Their agenda was a
delicate race between Hussein's failing health and his desire to make peace with Israel. The president
said he and Hillary pounded away on symptoms of national estrangement: closed boarders, water
disputes, travel barriers, war grievances, contested airspace, sealed electrical grids, and so on. Hussein
gave them a feast of goodwill without commitment on any point."" [Branch, 170]
> South Asia: Regarding her trip to South Asia with CVC in 1995, ""Her [HRC's] schedule was far more
demanding than ceremonial, pushing both conflict resolution and civic empowerment for downtrodden
women."" [Branch, 236] Later Branch tells of Benazir Bhutto praising CVC and HRC. ""By contrast with
a superficial American press, which portrayed Hillary as a demure tourist of no policy significance in
exotic Asia, Bhutto said she had touched essential political chords with whirlwind encouragements for
citizenship groups and small-scale economic development."" (The note contrasting Bhutto corresponds to
a NYT article which Branch quotes in the footer saying, ""she [HRC] played the traditional role of First
Lady as wife and mother..."") [Branch, 246]
> China Speech: Branch outlines how HRC felt the speech needed to be bigger than China and how she
depicted the ""harsh reality everywhere"" from China to Africa. He then cites WJC commenting on the
rave reviews of HRC's speech. [Branch, 289]
➢ Regarding the Russian financial system meltdown, Branch writes ""Yeltsin seemed so removed from
urgent political tasks that both Clintons counseled him directly."" [Branch, 512-513]
Jesse Jackson
Branch writes about Jesse Jackson calling CVC after the Lewinsky story broke and having continued contact
with her throughout the period. WJC thanks him for his support of CVC. This goes into some detail about WJCs
gratitude, but the fact that Jackson ""counseled"" CVC has been public knowledge dating back to at least 1999.
➢ ""But now Jesse had done something he would not forget. When the Lewinsky news broke, he called
Chelsea at Stanford. Jesse was the only nonfamily adult with her cell phone number. How he got it was
another story. Jesse said he knew this was terrible for her. Nothing like it had ever happened in
American politics. He did not know everything involved, but he wanted to remind Chelsea how much
her parents loved her. Their family needed to stick together now above all, and if she needed to counsel,
rage, or pray, he was always available."" [Branch, 497]
Tension with Janet Reno
Throughout the book, from his nomination of her, WJC is portrayed as having no opinion to having a negative
opinion of Janet Reno.
> ""He complained about Janet Reno—made it clear, in fact, that he felt alienated from his own attorney
general. If he removed her, however, the pending decision on yet another special prosecutor [for 1996
campaign finance] would fall to Reno's deputy, Jamie Gorelick, who, Clinton feared, may share Reno's
wholesale devotion to outside control for any case in which the president himself may become a
target...If he removed both Reno and Gorelick, to start fresh, it would touch off a firestorm of protest
like Nixon's Saturday Night Massacre of the Justice Department officials during the Watergate scandal.
That was not an option."" [Branch, 388-389]
> Branch writes about WJC talking about Reno and Louis Freeh disregarding a letter from D'Amato and
continuing to allow independent counsel to go after Ciseneros. The same held true for Mike Espy.
Branch then outlines a meeting between WJC and Reno. Reno had made public statements about her
""desire to stay on the job. 'I told her I didn't like that one damn bit,' the president said tersely. 'I didn't
hire her to work for the New York Times and Washington Post. I hired her to work for me.'"" [Branch,
398] He continues to outline that Clinton did give Reno credit for some good achievements including
coordination with U.S. attorneys and that he didn't blame her for the special prosecutor on Whitewater,
but that ""he did blame her for abdicating responsibility to supervise the investigations ever since, letting
mandates multiply almost at will. She accepted criteria that were ludicrous and crassly partisan. Reno
had failed to defend the presidency itself—not Clinton personally, but the institution—and by extension
the entire executive branch...He told me she had no clue what he meant. His advisers considered her
more naïve than upright, and the fuzziness of the distinction seemed to save her."" [Branch, 399] He cites
that Clinton warned her that she should prepare herself for not staying in the job for the entire second
term.
Portrayal of Jimmy Carter
There are parallels that could be drawn between WJC/BHO and Carter/WJC both in terms of Carter's trip to
North Korea and the mission he went on to Haiti. WJC clearly was frustrated by Carter's seeming desire to be
on the front lines.
North Korea:
➢ ""On North Korea, he [WJC] said Jimmy Carter had initiated his own recent trip with a call to Al Gore,
and Clinton had approved the volunteer mission to break through North Korea's extreme
isolation... Sure enough, Carter did reach North Korean dictator Kim Il-sung, who proposed to allow
inspection of North Korea's nuclear facilities in exchange for relief from the harsh economic sanctions.
The only hitch was that Carter announced the terms on CNN before they became official, adding
gratuitously that he never had agreed with sanctions in the first place. News stories had the White House
seething, but Clinton made light of the spat. He said the deal was since ratified by an exchange of letters,
and he did not believe Carter would criticize official policy 'if the game were still in doubt.' [Branch,
162]
Haiti:
➢ After pushing to be sent to Haiti and enlisting Colin Powell and Sam Nunn to get WJC to break with
Gore (who said Carter shouldn't be trusted a second time) and Christopher and approve the mission to
Haiti to seek a truce with the junta, Carter is portrayed as acting stubbornly and having 'clientitis'
(arguing for acceptance of Haitian generals versus what was in the United States' best interest). He
didn't want to leave and WJC told him he had to. Like after North Korea, Carter again, Carter went to
the press first. ""The three negotiators flew back to Washington late Sunday, and Carter, invited to stay
over at the White House, called CNN's Judy Woodruff after midnight to arrange an interview the next
morning before he reported to Clinton on his mission. This conduct, the president said tersely, was not
right...The press was full of retrospective stories about friction between him and his three prominent
negotiators...He said the current newsweeklies lapped up criticism by Carter as an embarrassment to
Clinton...Many of his advisers griped that Jimmy Carter thought he was still president, but Clinton
found this criticism too jaundiced. Carter had spoken with restraint at their joint press conference, he
allowed, exhibiting a keen political ear...To Clinton, Carter simply felt that he had earned the right to
speak his mind as an international statesman, even about a mission he had accepted for the United States
government complete with an Air Force jet. This sense of entitlement could make Carter a thorn, but
Clinton thought his value far outweighed the political annoyance. He considered Carter a sterling ex-
resident."" [Branch, 200-201]
Dispatch of Bombers Near Iraq
➢ ""He expected military strikes to win bipartisan assent, including former presidents Ford, Reagan and
Bush. 'Dole will support me,' he said. 'Carter will probably criticize me. Carter always criticizes, but he
doesn't have much positive to say."" [Branch, 518]
Gore
For the majority of the book, there is little discussion of WJC and Gore's relationship. There are few places
where he is briefly mentioned and a couple of scenes with some levity. The end, however, describes the
seemingly brutally candid conversation between the two about the 2000 election and the impeachment.
➢ On page 92 Branch writes, ""No, he [Clinton] did not ask Gore to take over a failed foreign policy, as
alleged, but to improve public presentations by his troika of 'bad talkers': shy National Security Adviser
Tony Lake, boring Secretary of State Warren Christopher, and disorganized Defense Secretary Les
Aspin."" [Branch, 92]
➢ In one-passage WJC talks about asking Gore to lead the independent review of Hazel O'Leary and also
having Gore substitute for him at an economic conference in Japan. The latter did not fare well as other
nations were offended that Gore, not WJC attended. Gore insisted that WJC needed to go to Japan to
redeem himself and the administration for his absence. Gore pointed to a few days in January, but WJC
""pronounced them vital to Chelsea's schoolwork. Gore blinked. So what?...Mutual exasperation spiked.
`Al,' Clinton told him, 'I am not going to Japan and leave Chelsea by herself to take these exams.' Gore
erupted. He thought Clinton had lost his bearing. They had a big fight, said the president, and were still
wrangling about dates for Japan."" Branch states that this fight wound up being around the time WJC saw
Lewinsky. [Branch, 316-317]
➢ On page 396-397 there is a scene, which shows Gore's sense of humor and Gore, WJC, et al working as
a team to secure the Cabinet for the second term.
➢ Later there is a passage about an exchange between WJC and HRC about Gore trying to hire a second
criminal lawyer. HRC already knew he was paying the first one $30,000 per month. The conversation is
about a leak of an offer from Jim Neal of TN, the former Watergate prosecutor to defend Gore for free.
The exchange is more on ethics of the offer and its leak to the press than about Gore.
➢ On Gore's announcing his campaign. ""The president had called twice to congratulate Gore for his
kickoff events—once from Geneva, hours later from Paris. Clinton thought the only glitches were
technical... But Gore got all the big things right. His twofold message was perfect: distinguish himself
from Clinton's personal flaws, and tell voters exactly what he would do for them in the White House.
The president said it was fine for Gore to call Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky 'inexcusable.'
First, it was true. Second, it showed a necessary strength to criticized the boss. Third, Gore would be
badgered to death until he did. 'Al,' Clinton told him, 'if you thought it would help in the campaign, I
would let you flog me at noon right on the doorstep of the Washington Post.'"" [Branch, 553-554]
Branch continues that WJC told Gore to ignore reporting that he was offended or critical of his
campaign. ""On tape, the president said he confided his chief strategic worry only to Gore himself and to
Gore's pollster, Mark Penn. The vice president must project his platform—where he stood, precisely
how and where he would lead the country—because the Republicans would try to knock him off
substance."" [Branch, 554]
➢ WJC offered critiques of Gore's campaign throughout, but it was always framed as his fear of Gore not
succeeding him. For example, ""Clinton still thought Gore could win. Most people considered him smart,
experience, and motivated. He examined the pitfalls for Gore in a campaign showcasing presidential
character over detailed agendas for the country. Reporters called Gore ""stiff,"" but Clinton discounted
this liability. He thought Gore's droll sense of humor would wear well over time. Gore also was
perceived to be too conventional a Democrat, therefore lacking independence, which called for Gore to
emphasize more his own passion and initiatives. Then the president said Gore could have a brooding
quality about him, not worrisome or off-putting in itself, but potentially damaging if his serious nature
failed to give voters a lifted. Clinton isolated the word ""sunny."" Gore needed more of it."" [Branch, 599]
➢ He also complimented Gore's knowledge of government workings. ""Gore knew Washington. Believe
me, said the president, his administration would have made many more errors in the first two years had
it not been for the vice president."" He then goes on to say that WJC suggested Gore find someone who
would be a bright spot to run with, perhaps Durbin or Bradley or Kerrey, although he also goes into
great detail about the virtues of Mikulski, even though she would never get chosen. How much of this
was WJC's emphasis versus Branch's focus on his home state senator is unclear. [Branch, 599, 618-19]
➢ WJC criticized Gore for not running on the successes of the administration. ""They should be running
essentially for a third term, said the president, but they were afraid the Clinton-Gore record would
tarnish them with Clinton's character."" [Branch, 623] Branch gives WJC's critique of Gore in debate
that had been heard before—that Gore lacked style and a light touch.
➢ Branch has WJC recalling a conversation between WJC and Gore where ""Gore had bared himself in one
of their stressful consultations by insisting that he, Gore, was a good politician, elaborating that he
meant good on the policy, and also good on the politics, but admitted that he did not instinctively blend
the two. Gore said he had to think about it, and Clinton thought this was pretty close to the bone...He
had the stuff to be a great president, and this was the message that Clinton must convey somehow
without seeming to brag on his own record."" [Branch, 623-624]
➢ The big passage about Gore begins on page 641 and extends to 645. Branch notes that WJC was unsure
at first about recording the details. At the outset it says, ""For his own part, Gore was not angry, nor did
he blame Clinton for his defeat, but he wanted to acknowledge forthrightly that some people around him
did."" [Branch, 642] It has WJC acknowledging that Gore's use of him was proper—he was best in the
White House. Then he says, ""'I think you made a mistake not to use me more in the last ten days,'""
Clinton told Gore, 'but otherwise that was not a big deal. I was much more upset about your message,
now that we're being honest.'"" [Branch, 642] Branch recalls WJC saying Gore fought bag saying that
""Clinton's drag plagued every direction."" Clinton then said that Gore was better at governance than
Clinton, and Gore would be better for the nation than Bush, and that he was an ""unparalleled"" vice
president, but that he had ""blind spots."" Branch writes that WJC kept saying their confrontation was
""surreal.""
o Gore had a ""fresh grievance...he wanted Clinton to know that the Buddhist temple fund-raising
scandal had been the worst experience of his life. No one had ever questioned his personal
integrity, but corrosive publicity and whispers had tormented him now for four years. Gore said
he had not been disposed to blame Clinton. However, he remembered telling the president that
he found himself the only English-speaking person at one of those Asian fund-raisers. And the
president was in charge of the party apparatus that was supposed to screen all the donations for
trouble. So he did blame Clinton in a way. The president told me he could scarcely believe the
ensuing tales of suspicion. Gore must still be in shock from the election, or unhinged. 'I thought
he was in Neverland,' he said."" [Branch, 643-644]
o Branch continues: ""The vice president asked Clinton about Monica Lewinsky. He had supported
Clinton all through the impeachment, publicly and privately, while declaring himself
disappointed. Yes, said the president. He appreciated that. However, persisted Gore, Clinton did
not confide any personal feelings. He never explained exactly what happened. There was little to
say, Clinton replied, beyond failure and regret. He was humiliated and angry, had made mistake.
He had misled the American people, and he was sorry. Gore closed his point with emphasis.
Well, he said, this is the first time you have apologized to me personally. Clinton did a double
take...Gore treated the confession as a watershed. Their colliding perspectives made both of
them angry. Clinton exploded that Gore's reaction was phony. What was so significant
here?...Gore exploded back. He was feeling a stubborn repeat of the defensiveness and delayed
honesty that somehow cost the election. Clinton's character was at the root of it..."" [Branch,
644-45]
Other
➢ Maggie as Person Recommending Panetta: Unlike in My Life, in Branch's book, it has WJC asking
Maggie to compile confidential suggestions for McLarty's replacement. ""Williams was shrewd, discreet,
and efficient."" [Branch, 161]
> HRC and Haiti Invasion: Branch asked WJC what HRC thought about his foreign policy team's
suggestion to invade Haiti. ""He said the pell-mell rush to invade was crazy to her. Reacting against the
pressure, the lack of options, and his sense of being trapped, she said he was badly served by his foreign
policy staff. He said she observed with some suspicion that the chief sponsors of the invasion—Lake,
Berger, and Talbott—were the same people who had pushed the ill-fated appointment of Bobby Ray
Inman as defense secretary."" [Branch, 189]
> ITAV: ITAV co-author flap in which Sally Quinn spread rumors that HRC had not written the book.
Quinn said that HRC had denied credit to the book's collaborator, Barbara Feinman, a friend of Quinn.
HRC said Feinman had withdrawn from the project. Branch notes that the White House had draft
chapters in HRC's handwriting. (Branch turned this to be about him and how it affected him as a
ghostwriter.) From this HRC said that Quinn and her friends launched a rumor that HRC and a female
veterinarian of Socks' were ""discovered...in flagrante on a bedroom floor in the White House."" [Branch,
342-343]
> Subpoenas of CVC's Friends: Branch tells of how D'Amato, as Chair of the Banking Committee, had
subpoenaed all those who might have been in the White House when HRC's Rose firm records were
there. This included ""some two dozen of Chelsea's sleepovers."" Senator Sarbanes quashed the
subpoenas for the sleepovers. [Branch, 362]
➢ Vernon Jordan Extramarital Sex: In the context of Lewinsky, Branch says of Vernon Jordan, ""In our
glancing associations, I had picked up from Vernon an attitude toward extramarital sex best described as
lighthearted or recreational."" [Branch, 495]
> Gore/HRC ticket: ""By the numbers, and Clinton's gut, a Gore-Hillary ticket would give Democrats their
best chance to defeat Bush for the White House. 'Hands down,' he [WJC] said, tut I don't think Al
would ever do it.'"" [Branch, 540]
> WJC suggesting Rubin run for NY Senate seat: The passage comes after WJC talks about supporting
HRC if she decided to run, which raises a question of whether he had preferred Rubin or whether the
two events are unconnected. ""When the president had urged him [Rubin] to run for and easily win the
New York Senate seat, Rubin recoiled...He could not fathom why Hillary wanted to run now...""
[Branch, 557]
➢ On trip to South Asia: Branch says that WJC agreed to cancel a stop in Bangladesh, because ""of hard
intelligence that Osama bin Laden had lined the route with assassins."" [Branch, 594] My Life discusses
the cancelled trip but does not specify it was because of bin Laden or assassins.
DI 'Gephardt is an asshole,"" Hillary commented. The president, pointing to my recorders, advised gently that the tapes were on. She
winced but shrugged with a smile. ""Well, he is,"" she insisted. In an awkward silence, I backed up both machines to erase the first
lady's epithet."" [Branch, 263]"
3086,"Just leaving Oslo. Jonas Store sure appreciates his good working rel with you, and seems super eager to help on Afpak.
Rumor is that, with elecitons behind them, he may be moved to (get this!) the health ministry. He's mum on subject,
but it makes political sense in Norway. Rumored rpt rumored successor is Jan Egeland-who would be a very good
choice, though Jonas is in a class by himself. Off to Istanbul. Cheers."
3087,FYI below — calling you in 5 minutes
3088,"Can u do norwegian fm stoere today?
Hea apparently still in norway
Is free from 10am-6pm.
We have a call sheet to send you."
3089,fyi
3090,"Counseling That Helps the Dying Live
By Devin Talbott and Strobe Talbott
Saturday, August 29, 2009
Many opponents of health-care reform have concentrated their fire on a provision in House
legislation that would provide for government reimbursement to doctors who offer end-of-life
counseling. How our society deals with those confronting death is understandably controversial.
Unfortunately, the debate has degenerated into a cacophony of demagoguery and distortion,
including invocations of Hitler and fear-mongering about ""death panels."" As a result of these
attacks, a number of senators who are key to determining what bill will emerge from Congress
have abandoned support for end-of-life counseling.
Our family's experience this year provided a vivid perspective on the value of that service and
the misguidedness of the campaign against it. Brooke Shearer -- wife, mother and grandmother
-- had been fighting cancer for more than a year. She had undergone major surgery, numerous
scans and biopsies, and two debilitating courses of chemotherapy. Her doctors were among the
best in their fields. Their expertise did not, however, extend to the fine points of, and latest
advances in, pain management.
Brooke was determined to maintain the highest possible quality of her own life and that of her
family for whatever time we had together. With that goal in mind, she sought advice and
treatment from palliative-care specialists at Washington Home and Community Hospices. Their
ingenuity and skill in adjusting her medications significantly alleviated her discomfort in her
final months. Working closely with her primary physicians, the hospice staff helped Brooke
anticipate the likely course of her disease in a way that allowed her to make decisions and
exercise a degree of control over both her own condition and our family's adjustment to it.
When her oncologist concluded that chemotherapy was not working, Brooke put herself fully
into the hands of Washington Home as an outpatient. Regular house calls by hospice doctors,
nurses and social workers enabled her to stay active on professional projects, spend time with
friends and family, and end her life at home, which was a considerable comfort to her and to us.
These, not issues of cost, were the principal considerations for our family. However, controlling
the cost of health care -- especially in the last year of life -- is an important part of the current
national debate. Therefore it is worth noting that Brooke's treatment in the last stages of her
illness was far less expensive than it had been in the previous year.
It has often been said that dying can be a full-time job. That was emphatically not the case with
Brooke. Until her final days, she concentrated on living -- a choice that end-of-life counseling
helped make possible. Hospice care more than meets the standard of the Hippocratic oath: It not
only does no harm -- it does good; it is not about hastening death but enhancing life. If
counseling about hospice services and palliative care is a beneficiary of health care reform,
many Americans will be as well.
Devin Talbott, along with his brother Adrian, is co-founder of GenerationEngage. Strobe
Talbott is president of the Brookings Institution.
Strobe Talbott
President, The Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202.797.6200"
3091,"Reached out to them.
Also faxing call sheet."
3092,"Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.gov>
Tuesday, August 18, 2009 1:29 PM
H
Dan Glickman returned your call
202-378-9112 w B6
I'll remind you when you get back here to main State.
###
Lauren Jiloty
Special Assistant to
Secretary Hillary R.odham. Clinton
JilotyLC@state.gov
c)"
3093,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, September 10, 2009 5:17 AM
H
Fw: Hormats Hrg
Fyi"
3094,"Cc: Oscar Flores
Norwegian fm stoere set for 10am
Call sheet has been faxed"
3095,"Left him a message
I don't think it will be a problem today but will doublecheck."
3097,"If you haven't read it yet, I commend the series that starts today in the NYT regarding his captivity.
Have a great Sunday. PJ"
3098,"Confirmed with mario. Weather supposed to improve throughout the day. In fact he said, the later the better so we are
ok for the 9."
3099,"Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.gov>
Thursday, September 10, 2009 7:01 AM
H
Abedin, Huma
Fw: Mini Schedule Thursday 9/10/09"
3100,Fyi
3102,He's reachable after 430pm
3103,flight.
3104,"I know we talked about no need for moc calls re sudan Rich is asking if u would do howard berman today. I sent sheet to
oscar if u want to do."
3105,Fyi
3106,"Our Co-Chairs, now Sec. of State McClintock and Dem. Comm. Chair Prats, have written a book about a campaign that
was historic in terms of a majority in PR and cooperation between statehooders and commonwealthers.
They want a foreword by you & WJC and pictures of your visits. I'll follow up with Cheyrl and Laura Graham on the
foreward and can do a draft if one is OK.
On Palau, I'll be following up with Jake. State's proposal would cut per capita income 20% over six years and 10% over
the 15 of the agreement being sought.
Jeff
Jeffrey L. Farrow
B6"
3107,Just berman he said
3109,"This is from from Egypt
FYI — what they are saying.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
3110,Susan called Payne today. We have also sent paper to Payne's africa subcommittee staff director.
3111,"The additional calls to be made today by Susan and Scott are listed below. It is our understanding that all these calls
were made (though a couple of house members were unavailable). We have also been in touch with all leadership and
key committee staff in the house and senate and sent them the relevant fact sheet/white paper on the new policy.
Ambassador Rice: Feingold■ Leahy■ Payne
Gration: Lowey■ Ros-Lehtinen■ Lee■ Capuano■ McCaul■ Isakson■ Corker■ Brownback■ Wolf"
3112,"ok
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
3113,"Relatively positive feedback. Some concern over the increased engagement and lingering concern over Scott's previous
comments. If he sticks to the agreed upon points tomorrow at the presser and in the follow up with the NGOs, think the
roll out will be well received, even with Friday nite's leak."
3115,14.0
3116,"Below is a note from rick olson for UAE bilat today:
Madam Secretary:
Ambassador Holbrooke asked that I convey to you the gist of a conversation he and I had with
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
Rick Olson
09/10/2024
169"
3117,Karine will be there at 6:45 tomorrow.
3118,"Karine at 7 instead.
Book just left office. Should be to u in 10 min."
3119,"•
•
/* non-sprited */ .ap_popover_unsprited .ap_body { background-image: url(http://g-ecx.images-
amazon. com/images/G/01/j avascripts/lib/popover/images/poleft_17. V248144977_.png); }
.appopover_unsprited .ap_body .ap_right { background-image: url(itp://g-ecx.images-
amazon.corn/images/G/01/javascripts/lib/popover/images/po_right_17. V248144979_.png); }
.appopover unsprited .ap_header .ap_left { background-image: url(htt—
p://g-ecx.images-
amazon.com7image
s/G/01/j avascripts/lib/popover/images/po_topleft. V265110087_.png);
.ap_popover unsprited .ap_header .ap_right { background-image: url(http://g-ecx.images-
amazon.com7images/G/01/javascripts/lib/popover/images/po_top_right. V265110087_.png); }
.ap_popovet unsprited .ap_header .ap_middle { background-image: urlChtt
p://g-ecx.images-
amazon. com7ima
ges/G/01/j avascripts/lib/popover/images/po_top._V265110086_.png); }
.ap_popover unsprited .ap_footer .ap_left { background-image: url(http://g-ecx.images-
amazon.com/images/G/01/j avascripts/lib/popover/images/po_bottomieft. V265110084_.png); }
.ap_popover unsprited .ap_footer .ap_right { background-image: url(http://g-
ecx.images-
amazon. com/images/G/01/j avascripts/lib/popover/images/po_bottom_right. V265110087_.png); }
.ap_popover unsprited .ap_footer .ap_middle { background-image: url(http://g
-ecx.images-
amazon. com7im
ages/G/01/javascripts/lib/popover/images/po_bottom._V265110084_.png); } /*
Everything else -- sprited */ .ap_popover_sprited .ap_body .ap_left, .ap_popover_sprited .ap_body
.ap_right { background-image: url(http://g-ecx.images-
amazon.com/images/G/01/javascripts/lib/popover/images/light/sprite-v._V219326283_.png); }
.ap_popover_sprited .ap_header .ap_left, .ap_popover_sprited .ap_header .ap_right, .ap_popover_sprited
.ap_header .ap_popover _sprited .ap_footer .ap_left, .ap_popover_sprited .ap_footer
.ap_right, .ap_popover_sprited .ap_footer .ap_middle, .ap_popover_sprited .ap_closebutton {
background-image: url(http://g-ecx.images-
amazon.com/images/G/01/javascripts/lib/popover/images/light/sprite-h._V219326280_.png); }
.ap_popover_sprited .ap_body .ap_right-arrow, .ap_popover_sprited .ap_body .ap_left-arrow
background-image: url(http://g-ecx.images-
amazon. com/images/G/01/j avascripts/lib/popover/images/light/sprite-arrow-v._V219326286_.png); }
Vote for magazines, enter to
Yo
Ac
Amazon.com I Today's
Deals I Gifts & Wish
amazon.com Lists I Gift Cards
Shop All
Departments
Search
Books
[Books V]
=
Advanced Browse New
2
The New York Libros enBarq
Search SubjectsReleases
0 Bestsellers
Times® Bestsellers espariol Boo
o Books
• Books
• Kindle Books
• Textbooks
• Magazines
o Movies, Music & Games
• Movies & TV
• Blu-ray
• Video On Demand
• Music
• MP3 Downloads
• Musical Instruments
• Video Games
• Game Downloads
o Digital Downloads
• Kindle Store
Books, newspapers & more
• Video On Demand
• MP3 Downloads
• Amazon Shorts
Digital short-form literature
• Game Downloads
o Kindle
• Kindle
Amazon's 6"" wireless reading device
• Kindle DX
Amazon's 9.7"" wireless reading device
• Accessories
• Books
• Newspapers
• Magazines
• Blogs
• Kindle Store
o Computers & Office
• Computers & Accessories
• Computer Components
• Software
• PC Games
• Office Products & Supplies
o Electronics
• 11/ & Video
• Home Audio & Theater
• Camera & Photo
• Cell Phones & Service
• Video Games
• MP3 & Media Players
• Car Electronics & GPS
• Home Appliances
• Musical Instruments
o Home & Garden
• Kitchen & Dining
• Furniture & Decor
• Bedding & Bath
• Home Appliances
• Vacuums & Storage
• Home Improvement
• Patio, Lawn & Garden
• Pet Supplies
• Sewing, Craft & Hobby
o Grocery, Health & Beauty
• Grocery
• Natural & Organic
• Gourmet Food
• Health & Personal Care
• Beauty
o Toys, Kids & Baby
• Toys & Games
• Baby
• Apparel (Kids & Baby)
• Books
• Movies
• Music
• Video Games
• Software
o Apparel, Shoes & Jewelry
• Apparel & Accessories
• Shoes
• Jewelry
• Watches
o Sports & Outdoors
• Exercise & Fitness
• Outdoor Recreation
• Action Sports
• Team Sports
• Cycling
• Golf
• Fan Gear
• All Sports & Outdoors
o Tools, Auto & Industrial
• Power & Hand Tools
• Home Improvement
• Outdoor Power Equipment
• Automotive
• Motorcycle & ATV
• Industrial & Scientific
o All Lists & Registries
0
o » Wish List
o >> Shopping List
• » Gift Organizer
0
o » Your Media Library
0
• » Wedding Registry
o » Baby Registry
0
o » Amazon Remembers
Republican Gomorrah and over 300,000 other books are available for Amazon Kindle -
Amazon's new wireless reading device. Learn more
Ci
Share your own
customer images
Search inside this
book
Start
reading
Republican
Gomorrah
on your
Kindle in
under a
minute.
Don't have
a Kindle?
Get yours
here.
Republican Gomorrah: Inside the Movement that
Shattered the Party (Hardcover)
by Max Blumenthal
(Author)
• Hardcover: 416 pages
• Publisher: Nation Books (September 8, 2009)
• Language: English
• ISBN-10: 1568583982
• ISBN-13: 978-1568583983
• Product Dimensions: 9.3 x 6.1 x 1.5 inches
• Shipping Weight: 1.4 pounds (View shipping rates and policies)
• Average Customer Review:
8 Reviews
5 star: (7)
4 star: (1)
3 star: (0)
2 star: (0)
1 star: (0)
> See all 8 customer reviews...
> See all discussions...
• 4.9 out of 5 stars See all reviews (8 customer reviews)
• Amazon.com Sales Rank: #10 in Books (See Bestsellers in Books)
Popular in these categories: (What's this?)
#1 Books > Nonfiction > Politics > Political Parties
in
Quantity: [2 V]
El-
or
Ship to:
[Sidney BI u-
Wash V]
[ ] Add gift-
wrap/note
or
Amazon
Prime
Free Trial
required.
Sign up
when you
check
out. Learn
More
Amazon Prime
Free Triai
Free Two-Day
Shipping is
available to
Amazon Prime
members. To
join, click ""Add to
Cart with FREE
Two-Day
Shipping"" and
confirm your
Amazon Prime
Free Trial sign-
up during
checkout.
Amazon Prime
members enjoy:
• Unlimited Free
Two-Day
Shipping
• One-Day
Shipping for
just
$3.99/item
• No Minimum
Purchase for
free or
discounted
shipping
Important: Your
credit card will
NOT be charged
when you start
your Free Trial or
if you cancel
during the trial
period. If you're
happy with
Amazon Prime,
do nothing. At
the end of the
Free Trial, your
membership will
automatically
upgrade to a full
year for $79.
=2 0
®-
More
Buying
Choices
18
used &
new
from
$15.11
Have one
to sell?
Sell
yours
here
Share with Friends
#1 Books > History > World
in
#2 Books > Nonfiction > Social Sciences > Political Science > Political
inDoctrines"
3120,"She actually moved the event to Geneva in December. Melanne feels we should just send a video, it is not worth
factoring into our travel overseas. I will show you the invite today."
3121,"730 works for me
Thx"
3122,730 am works - we can have ops connect evertyone
3123,That is fine for me.
3124,"ctikoliingtonVo't
NEWS I POLITICS I OPINIONS I BUSINESS I LOCAL I SPORTS I ARTS & LIVING I GOING OUT GUIDE I JOBS I CARS I REAL ESTATE
SHOPPING
Ad•••■•■■•.. • us. kl
Reasonable people can disagree on whatever it was
By Al Kamen
Monday, October 19, 2009
They call it the World's Greatest Deliberative Body (WGDB), Part I.
The Senate Judiciary Committee last week was reviewing an amendment by Sen. Richard Durbin (D-I11.) to the
USA Patriot Act to clarify the legal standard needed for an investigation under the act. The amendment was
intended to provide greater protections from abuse by investigators.
His colleague, Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-Minn.), spoke in opposition, agreeing with committee Chairman Patrick
Leahy (D-Vt.) and ranking Republican Jeff Sessions (Ala.) that additional protections are not needed.
""I would just point to the actual language in here,"" Klobuchar said, ""which is, it's not like this is some pie-in-
the-sky standard here. I mean, it specifically says,"" she noted approvingly, reading aloud from the bill, that there
have to be ""reasonable grounds to believe that the information sought is relevant to an authorized national
security investigation,"" and you can't investigate someone just for exercising free speech rights and there's got
to be some suspected foreign agent involved.
""So I just, for anyone listening to this, it is not like there is no standard,"" she concluded. ""There is a standard in
place here.""
""That's the standard that is in the bill now?"" Sessions asked.
Klobuchar nodded that it was.
No it's not, Durbin interrupted. ""Senator Klobuchar, you just read my amendment,"" not the bill, he said -- ""and I
think it's critically important that you understand what we're establishing here.""
Whatever. Klobuchar voted against the amendment, which got only a handful of votes anyway.
Blame the gatekeeper
The usual pattern at the State Department is that the new secretary arrives at Foggy Bottom for the first day of
work and enters to rousing cheers from career Foreign Service folks hoping the new boss will actually heed
their expert advice. (They are, by nature, an optimistic crowd.)
Then, after 7 months, 8 days and 12 hours, on average, the grumbling begins that the secretary is ""not
accessible"" to senior career folks, that she's overly protected by her personal staff, that the promised ""open
door"" has slammed shut. The fingers start pointing, usually at the secretary's chief of staff. These days, that's
Cheryl Mills, who holds that post for Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton.
We're hearing complaints even from members of the inner circle that the overworked Mills -- chief of staff,
counselor, overseer of Haiti policy and food security policy and the department motor pool (okay, not really) --
has made entry to Clinton's suite something like penetrating the Green Zone in Baghdad.
Not so, says Undersecretary of State William Burns, the department's top career official. ""This secretary is in
touch every day with as many people across the department as possible, and Cheryl is a big part of making that
happen.""
Another senior State official said Clinton has been on the road a lot: Asia in July and Africa in August and
Ireland and Moscow just the other day, and soon she'll be back on the road, pretty much until Thanksgiving.
There have also been a bunch of meetings of late on AfPak matters.
Hey, just telling you what we're hearing.
In a timely fashion ...
The Loop Better-Late-Than-Never award this year goes to the State Department's personnel bureau. The bureau,
in an Oct. 13 notice, said it had awarded a $1.6 million contract to Campion Services Inc. in West Lafayette,
Ind., to ""assist the department in ensuring that all examinations for Foreign Service [jobs] have been
professionally validated and constitute a reliable means of identifying those applicants with the greatest
possibility of success in the foreign service.""
Well, good thing the department's only been hiring for a couple of hundred years.
The rest of the résumé
The White House last week announced that President Obama had selected Jessie H. Roberson, a nuclear expert
and senior vice president of environmental affairs for the Atlantic Sea Island Group, to be a member of the
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board. The bio notes her previous jobs, even her undergraduate degree in
nuclear engineering.
Name sounds familiar. Roberson, Roberson: Wasn't she Dubya's appointee as assistant secretary of the Energy
Department for environmental management, the $6 billion-a-year weapons cleanup program? That's not
mentioned in the White House release, but she was there from 2001 to 2004.
Waterboarding for kids?
WGDB, Part II: Sen. Tom Coburn (R-Okla.) must be feeling stressed these days over the travails of his pal, Sen.
John Ensign (R-Nev.). For those who missed it, Coburn took to the Senate floor last week to decry federal
deficits, which are not, for him, an abstraction.
""It is deeply personal with me,"" Coburn explained. ""I have five grandchildren. I look in their eyes, and I see the
potential of their lives and all of these other children who are out there. You know what? We are going to
waterboard them. That is what we are going to do. We are going to waterboard them. We are going to flood
them with debt. We are going to shackle their opportunities. We are going to limit their possibilities because we
don't have the courage to make the difference for their future.""
Wait a minute! It's just a dunk in the water.
© 2009 The Washington Post Company"
3125,FYI
3127,"Sullivan, Jacob i <Sullivanii@state.gov>
Sunday, November 1, 2009 7:21 AM
H; Abedin, Huma
Fyi for Eikenberry call"
3128,"the Media.docx; 102809-BM-Democracy Assistance Dialogue.docx; 102809-BM-
Foundation for the Future.doc; 102809-BM-Gender Institute.doc
Here's some general background info on FFF from NEA.
The gender initiative has potential but right now it's just a framework. It's going to take leadership. There are so many
good practices in the region that could be shared -- Morocco's family law reform being an excellent example."
3130,Apologies. I can come down now if you'd like.
3131,"I am getting ready to call you shortly re this - jake will give you some background.
Cdm"
3132,"Madame Secretary:
Thank you for reaching out to Secretary Solis and convincing her to join the Verification Commission. She and Ricardo
Lagos will make for a very high profile and effective international component of the Commission.
We will meet with her this morning at 10 am to brief her for Tuesday's journey to Honduras. At this point, it appears we
have a military aircraft available. The plan is for the U.S. Delegation to depart D.C., stop in Miami to pick up Ricardo
Lagos, and arrive in Tegucigalpa together. We think this will send a powerful message to Hondurans and leave no doubt
about our commitment to seeing this process through to a successful conclusion.
You should be aware that Ambassador Hugo Llorens is under public assault. The Wall Street Journal dedicates its
America's column this morning to attacking him and calling for his removal. Last Friday, Representative Connie Mack did
the same. This chorus will grow as the extent of our accomplishment is understood. Llorens is a tough, stalwart guy. He
and his Mission have held firm during this crisis. A call from you would be a big boost.
Finally, we will hold an IPC today to identify further steps. We will keep you up to date on these steps and identify
further opportunities for your engagement.
I want to thank you for your leadership and support during this long crisis. Your willingness to engage at key moments
and take risks at the right time have propelled us much further than anyone expected. Your diplomacy prevented a
debilitating civil conflict in Honduras that would have destabilized Central America and undermined two decades of our
efforts. We now have a big opportunity in front of us, and for that we are grateful to you.
Regards,
Tom"
3133,Will do Madam Secretary.
3134,Yes coming now
3135,KellyC@state.gov
3136,DaalderlH@state.gov
3137,HolbrookeRC@state.gov
3138,"Gordon, Philip H <GordonPH@state.gov>
Monday, November 2, 2009 10:18 AM
H
■
RE:
Many thanks. Got the call readout.
Will get team focused on using the period between now and Athens (OSCE) to do so.
Safe travels,
Phil"
3140,"November 2. 2009
For: Hillary"
3142,"We just hung up.
Checked on you but you were sleeping
If you want me to come give you download, I will be up for a while Otherwise, can talk in am."
3143,"sbwhoeop
Monday, November 2, 2009 6:23 PM
H
FYI: When you have a chance, re: what Wm. Hague told you, relevant undercurrent to
EU debate. Sid
FrsOrn The Times
November 3, 2009
I suggest a night at the theatre, Mr Cameron
A sop to the party's Europhobes has left the Conservative leader defending the indefensible. He should be
ashamed
David Aaronovitch
On Friday morning David Cameron called upon David Miliband to apologise. On Friday evening I went to see a play. The
play was Our Class, by the Polish playwright, Tadeusz Slobodzianek.
In a series of short ""chapters"" Slobodzianek followed a group of classmates in a small Polish village from 1925 to 2002.
Like the village, the class was half Catholic and half Jewish. In 1941, as the Germans replaced the Russians as the
occupiers, almost all the Jews of the area were murdered in a single day. Slobodzianek shows what led up to the
massacre and what happened afterwards. It is unbearable.
Though the village is not named in the play, it is based on real events that took place at Jedwabne on July 10, 1941. As
Poland's Institute of National Memory concluded in 2002, on that day 40-50 Jewish men were forced to parade around the
town singing songs, and were then led to a barn on the outskirts where, one by one, they were killed with knives, axes
and cleavers and then thrown in a pit. Then 300 or more women and children were led from the town square to the barn
and locked inside. Kerosene was poured over the roof and walls and set alight. The screams could be heard from two
kilometres away; no one survived.
In 2001 it was finally acknowledged what many people had known all along. The murderers hadn't been Germans, but
local Poles, as depicted in Our Class. Alexander Kwasniewski, then the Polish President, apologised to the dead Jews
and their survivors at a ceremony in Jedwabne ""in my own name, and in the name of those Poles whose conscience is
shattered by that crime"".
History matters. Few believe that as much as the Law and Justice party of Michel Kaminski, who leads the Tory-backed
group in the European Parliament. The party's leaders have demanded apologies from the Russians for the massacre of
21,000 Polish officers at Katyn in 1940 and their references to terrible Polish historical suffering have constituted a big
part, of their political appeal.
But despite his historical sensitivity Mr Kaminski, the MEP for the Jedwabne area, did not support the 2001 apology. He
opposed it vigorously, associating himself with the ""Committee to Defend the .Good Name of Jedwabne"". Among its
leading members were the local priest, Edward Orlowski, who — asked by journalists whether he would be attending the
ceremony at which the President apologised — said: ""These are all lies. it is not my business. Germans are responsible,
so why should we apologiSe?""
Mr Kaminski developed a slightly different rationale. As he told an interviewer for a far-right newspaper, Our Poland, the
murders — which he abhorred — were the work of a few outcasts, and that he would only apologise if someone ""from the
Jewish side"" apologised for how ""the Jews"" behaved during the Soviet occupation from 1939 to 1941. Last month Mr
Kaminski (who had denied giving the interview) confirmed this position. ""If you are asking the Polish nation to apologise
for the crime made in Jedwabne,"" he said, ""you would require the whole Jewish nation to apologise for what some Jewish
communists did in Eastern Poland.""
It is this argument that so incenses me,•as it would anyone, I think, who had sat through Our Class. The idea of collective
Jewish Bolshevism was a major anti-Semitic trope before the war; it was a major element of self-justification after it.
Mr Kaminski denied the apology, denied the need for it, equated the massacre to ""Jewish actions"" and allied himself with
those who denied the massacre altogether, fulfilling the historian Pierre Vidal-Naquet's observation about patterns of
massacre denial: ""it never happened, it happened but was justified, they did it to themselves, they did it to us."" Mr
Kaminski's view was described as disgraceful by Mr Miiiband. Having read an enormous amount on Jedwabne in the last
few weeks, I think Mr Miliband is completely right — it is disgraceful. And as he might well demand of Mr Cameron: ""I
should apologise?""
But more than that, I find myself amazed by how Mr Cameron ever came to be in the position of demanding that a foreign
secretary, descended from Polish Jews, should apologise for possibly offending the sensibilities of a foreign politician who
vehemently opposed there being an apology for the massacre of Polish Jews. I think of all the things that Mr Cameron has
got right in his leadership of the. Conservatve Party and my mental jaw drops at the sheer wrongness of it.
Now Tory columnists, bioggers and activists are devoting their time to nitpicking sophistry about the nature of collective
guilt, and to attacking non-existent ""smears"" that they say have been attached to the unlovely person of Mr Kaminski.
Why?
It is true, as embattled Conservatives have argued, that many of the grand European coalitions contain people whose
history is problematic. There are odds and sods in the big conservative grouping, the EPP, and in the socialist group. But
these personalities are far outweighed by the parties of the IVIerkels and Sarkozys. The Polish member of the EPP, for
example, is the ruling free-market, non-nationalist conservative party of Donald Tusk — almost certainly the party that Mr
Cameron would join if he were a Pole. The new Tory grouping, the European Conservatives and Reformists, by contrast,
is all about odds and sods whom a continental Cameron would certainly shun, bar one organisation — the British
Conservatives.
So why get yourself into a position where you have to explain that the Latvian SS wasn't so bad really, and that Mr
Kaminski has an understandable position on collective guilt? And the answer seems to be that Mr Cameron promised his
Europhobes in his leadership campaign back in 2005 that he would leave the ""federalist"" EPP, and that the logical
outcome of this move has been the weird alliance that he now finds himself defending.
Was it all necessary? No. Was it in Britain's interests? Absolutely not. is it in the interests of progressive Conservatism?
You must be joking. So has this happened because Mr Cameron doesn't really care enough about Europe to think
through the consequences of his own lightly given promises, or because he's just as much a Euro-nutter as those sects,
the Hannanites, the Cashists and the Redwoodians?
This is the kind of advice I loathe, but I'll say it anyway. Go to see Our Class, Mr C. This is one hole you don't want to
keep digging."
3144,FYI
3145,Am sure u saw but just in case
3147,"FYI — Johnnie flagged this for me.
cdm"
3148,I am up - you want me to call you?
3149,"Fyi
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
3150,"sbwhoeoP
Thursday, November 5, 2009 12:28 AM
H
FYI: Decline and Fall of the British Empire, 2009 edition. Sid
France: 'Autistic Tories have castrated UK in
Europe'
French Europe minister says David Cameron's pledge to reclaim EU powers is 'pathetic' and will leave Britain isolated
Nicholas',Nat, Patrick yVintpur and :15;rattori.
c.,uardiari.,;:o.uk, Wednesday 4 November 2009 21.30 GMT
The Cohseri?t,vea were accused by the French government tonight of ""castrating"" Britain's position within the EU by
adopting an ""autistic"" approach that would take Britain off the radar.
Speaking to the Guardian, Pierre Lellouche, France's Europe minister, described as ""pathetic"" the Tories' EU plans
announced today, warning they would not succeed ""for a minute"".
Giving vent to frustration across the EU, which has so'far only been expressed in private, Lellouche — who said he was
reflecting Nicolas Sarkozy's ""sadness and regret"" — accused William Hague, the shadow foreign secretary, of a ""bizarre
autism"" in their discussions.
He said: ""They have one line and they just repeat one line. It is a very bizarre sense of autism.""
Lellouche, one of the most Anglophile members of Sarkozy's government, made his remarkable intervention after David
Caii.e.con outlined a fresh Tory approach to the EU in the wake of the full ratification of the Lisbon treaty.
A future Conservative government would seek to strengthen British sovereignty and repatriate a series of powers Over
social and employment legislation, the Tory leader said.
Cameron said he was not seeking an immediate ""bust-up"" with the EU, and would allow the repatriation of powers
negotiations to last as long as five years.
But that position was not enough for the Tory MEP Daniel Hannan, who quit his role as the party's legal affairs spokesman
in Europe, saying he intended to fight for referendums to enable Britain to become ""self-governing"".
France's centre-right government condemned Cameron's plans, saying that they would marginalise Britain within the EU.
Abandoning all diplomatic niceties, Lellouche said: ""It's pathetic. It's just very sad to see Britain, so important in Europe,
just cutting itself out from the rest and disappearing from the radar map .... This is a culture of opposition ... It is the result
of a long period of opposition. I know they will come back, but I hope the trip will be short."" He said Cameron's approach
was in line with the Tories' decision to abandon the main centre-right EPP grouping in the European parliament, of which
Sarkozy's UMP party is a member.
""They are doing what they have done in the European parliament. They have essentially castrated your UK influence in
the European parliament,"" he said.
Lellouche said he has told Hague personally that his position was a ""waste of time for all of us"".
""I have told William Hague: go away for two to three years, in your political economic situation you're going to be all by
your self and you'll come back. Go ahead and do it. That is my message to them ... You want to be marginalised? Well,
you go for it. But it's a waste of time for all of us,"" the French minister said.
Lellouche made clear the Tories had no hope of securing support for their plans. ""It's not going to happen for a minute.
Nobody is going to indulge in rewriting [treaties for] many, many years. Nobody is going to play with the institutions again.
It's going to be take it or leave it and they should be honest and say that,"" he said. ""It is a time of tumultuous waters all
around us. Wars, terrorism, proliferation, Afghanistan, energy with Russia, massive immigration, economic crisis. It is time
when the destiny of Europe is being defined — whether or not we will exist as a third of the world's GDP capable of fighting
it out on climate, on trade, on every ... issue on the surface of the Earth.
""We need to be united, otherwise we will be wiped out and marginalised. None of us can do it alone. Whether you're big
or small, the lessbn is the same. And [Britain's] risk is one of marginalisation. Irrelevance."" He explained: ""Finally we have
institutional package, but it took 15 years of looking at our navel and getting everybody bored to death with sterile debate"".
In a sign of France's determination to resist the Tory plans to opt out of key EU legislation, Lellouche warned the French
would attempt to reduce Britain's EU budget rebate which will be up for negotiation during the next parliament.
He pointed out that France is a net EU contributor to the tune of €5bn (E4.5bn), unlike Britain which receives a rebate.
""If we get a government that is ferociously anti European that will vote down this kind of legislation then I think the
relationship is going to be very difficult. As we enter the next phase one of the issues we have to discuss midterm is of
course finances. France is a net contributor to the tune of €5bn a year, of which €1.5bn is the same as British rebate. That
should tell you quite a bit huh?"" he said.
Cameron will be angered by the attack, and what it implies for Tory relations with the rest of Europe although in the short
term he will be more concerned to ensure his strategy of abandoning a referendum on the Lisbon treaty does not provoke
cries, of betrayal on his backbenches.
Hague reacted to the French criticism by insisting that Lellouche's comments did not represent the true reception of the
Tories' plans in Europe.
""That is not how we are seen across Europe,"" he told BBC2's Newsnight, adding his party had established good relations
with Sarkozy's party.
""1 don't think you will find that's representative of the reaction in Paris or other European capitals,"" he added."
3151,"sbwhoeor
Thursday, November 5, 2009 12:40 AM
H
Memo: agenda for Merkel, transatlantic economic council we discussed. Sid
hrc memo merkel transatlantic council 110509.docx
November 5, 2009
For: Hillary"
3153,"I've attached the gorgeous cover as a PDF
Hillary's Moment: Clinton Faces the World
By Joe Klein
Time Magazine
Wednesday, Nov. 04, 2009
It was Halloween night in Jerusalem, and Benjamin Netanyahu came dressed as a peacemaker. ""We're prepared to start
peace talks immediately,"" the notoriously reluctant Israeli Prime Minister proclaimed, with U.S. Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton standing at his side, poker-faced. ""I think we should ... get on it and get with it.""
It was a ploy, of course. The Palestinians were tangled up in themselves, yet again. They had elections looming, and their
leader, Mahmoud Abbas, had to hang tough: he was demanding a total freeze to Israeli settlement-building on the West
Bank — which was precisely what the Obama Administration had previously said it favored. Netanyahu was offering a
partial freeze, not including new settlements in East Jerusalem, the desired capital of a future Palestinian state. This was
a nonstarter for the Palestinians, but it had the holographic glow of a step forward. It was an ""unprecedented"" offer,
Netanyahu trumpeted, with the joy of a chess master springing a trap.(See photos from 60 years of Israel.)
It was a tough moment for Clinton, playing second fiddle at the Bibi-does-Gandhi show. President Barack Obama had
softened his language on the settlements a few weeks earlier: instead of a total freeze, he had talked about Israeli
""restraint"" in settlement-building. And now Clinton seemed to cement the Administration's retreat, agreeing that
Netanyahu's proposal was, indeed, ""unprecedented,"" even though the U.S. still favored a total freeze. The most
important thing, she added, was for the parties to get to the table as quickly as possible. The onus was back on the
Palestinians — and the Palestinians quickly expressed outrage at the Obama Administration's retreat. Their Arab
neighbors soon joined in, causing Clinton to backtrack two days later, telling reporters the Israeli plan ""falls far short"" of
U.S. expectations, although she still insisted on calling it ""unprecedented,"" which was neither diplomatic nor wise.
Suddenly the Obama Administration seemed wobbly on the Middle East; clearly, Clinton had been too bullish on
Netanyahu's proposal (which had been negotiated over months with Middle East envoy George Mitchell and was seen,
privately, by the Americans as real progress). But the Administration's mission was to get the parties into peace talks
without preconditions. The Israelis were now in favor of talks. The Palestinians were setting preconditions. And Clinton
had violated an essential rule of her job: boring is almost always better.(See photos from the life and career of former
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.)
Clinton's Three Qualities
For the past 40 years, the awkward Middle East press conference has helped define the job of Secretary of State. You go
to Jerusalem or Ramallah; you stand there ""guardedly optimistic"" in public; in private, you try to move a comma, but the
Israelis or Palestinians move, a semicolon to block your comma. The result is almost always the same: gridlock. The
breakthroughs, when they come, emanate from others. Walter Cronkite asks Anwar Sadat if he'd be willing to go to
Jerusalem ... and Sadat, to everyone's surprise, says yes. The Israelis and Palestinians hold secret meetings in Oslo and
reach what appears to be a breakthrough — they're talking! — which then becomes another dead end.
The job of Secretary of State is more thankless than glamorous; in some ways, the Department of State, a noble antique,
is still trying to come to terms with the invention of the telephone. In an era when Twitter haiku-messaging rules,
diplomacy moves at the speed, and requires the nuanced complexity, of literature. Power has drifted from State to the
National Security Council and the Pentagon, especially in wartime. Only a few of Clinton's recent predecessors have
distinguished themselves. Henry Kissinger, a National Security Adviser who belatedly became Secretary of State, was
Richard Nixon's schizophrenic alter ego; George Shultz was a strong policy voice in the Reagan Administration; James
Baker had clout because he was George H.W. Bush's best friend and a world-class dealmaker. Most of the others have
been frustrated or forgettable. And yet this is Hillary Clinton we're talking about — the second most popular American in
the world, an eternally compelling and supremely talented character, the subject of constant speculation, a walking
headline. Her very presence in the job makes it crucial once more.
It is a cliché to say that by naming Clinton, Obama brought his most popular potential opponent into the tent. The
conventional wisdom, too cynical by half, is that he thereby succeeded in neutering her, a theory bolstered by Clinton's
reticence during her first nine months on the job, with special envoys like Mitchell and Richard Holbrooke doing the
heavy lifting of diplomacy. But by naming Clinton, Obama also gave her great power, which cuts both ways: if she
becomes dissatisfied with her role or the Administration's policies, she can become a torpedo aimed at the Oval Office.
Colin Powell had similar power and a real gripe — the Iraq war — but never used it. Clinton has no such gripe, but as the
Obama Administration settles in and policy differences begin to emerge among the key players, the Powell conundrum
looms: How will Clinton choose to use her power? How will Obama react if and when she does?
Traditionally, the Secretary of State is judged on his or her ability to formulate policy, negotiate deals and manage the
striped-pants bureaucracy. Clinton has no history as a global strategist, although her performance in the 2008 campaign
indicates that she is a bit more conservative than the President, more the foreign policy realist than the Wilsonian
idealist. It is also too early to judge her skill as a manager or negotiator — although her performance in Jerusalem
indicates that she needs a few lessons in Middle East Haggling 101.
There are, however, three qualities that could make her a memorable Secretary of State. She brings a vision of
departmental reform — the need to elevate foreign aid programs to the same status and rigorous scrutiny as diplomacy
— that could change striped pants into chinos in the developing world. She is also the first elected politician to hold the
office since Edmund Muskie briefly did during the Carter Administration, which has enabled her to better understand
and interact with the politicians who run places like Afghanistan and Pakistan. But most important, she is an
international celebrity with a much higher profile than any of her recent predecessors and the ability — second only to
the President's — to change negative attitudes about the U.S. abroad.
She has the potential to become the most powerful public diplomat the U.S. has fielded in quite some time, although
her performance so far, at home and abroad, has occasionally been perplexing. At home, she has often seemed
tentative and deferential. In a conversation with Secretary of Defense Robert Gates aired by CNN in early October,
Clinton's cautious formality took a backseat to Gates' brisk, humorous confidence on policy issues. Abroad, she seems
far more confident, at times to the point of recklessness, as in Jerusalem. (See photos of the last days of Hillary Clinton's
campaign.)
Independence and Candor
In the last week of October, Secretary Clinton moved squarely to the center of the world stage, attempting, at the
behest of her special envoys, to improve the rocky alliance with Pakistan and nudge the Middle East pugilists into talks.
In the course of the trip, there were the first stray wisps of a hint that Clinton wanted to begin asserting her
independence, as the Administration, facing roadblocks across the world, struggled for a firmer foreign policy tone after
an opening nine months that might be called the Rodney King — ""Can't we all just get along?"" — phase.
During her three days in Pakistan, she ran a gauntlet of town-hall meetings and media interviews that may have been
unprecedented, to use the word of the week, for a U.S. Secretary of State. The trip, planned by Holbrooke and Pakistan
specialist Vali Nasr, offered an unusually subtle itinerary for a U.S. diplomatic mission. A visit to a Sufi mosque that had
been bombed by Sunni extremists, for example, sent a powerful message to Pakistan's moderate Islamic majority. ""We
saw her praying there,"" an academic named Shala Aziz told me, ""and, for the first time, I'm thinking, The Americans have
hearts.""(See photos of the suicide bombings in Islamabad.)
The big news was that Clinton allowed herself to be hammered with hostile questions from students, talk-show hosts
and Pashturi elders -- and that, on occasion, she pushed back, raising incredibly sensitive issues, like why no one in the
Pakistani government knew where Osama bin Laden was, even though he had been in the country since 2002. Press
accounts either emphasized the embarrassment of a Secretary of State's getting pummeled or fixed on Clinton's
undiplomatic bluntness. But they missed the point: her candor, her willingness to listen to and acknowledge criticism,
had begun to undermine the prevailing Pakistani image of the U.S. as arrogant and bossy, more interested in having the
Pakistani military fight its war against al-Qaeda and the Taliban than in having a true strategic partnership. The contrast
was especially sharp after George W. Bush's eight years of unqualified support for the military dictatorship of Pervez
Musharraf. ""In the past, when the Americans came, they would talk to the generals and go home,"" said Farahnaz
Ispahani, a government spokeswoman and Member of Parliament. ""Clinton's willingness to meet with everyone, hostile
or not, has made a big impression — and because she's Hillary Clinton, with a real history of affinity for this country, it
means so much more.""
Transformative Experience
There are no toasts at state dinners in Pakistan, because there is no alcohol. There are opening statements, though, and
Clinton's — delivered impromptu on the first night of her trip after tossing aside her notes — was surprisingly emotional.
Earlier in the day, President Asif Ali Zardari, the widower of Benazir Bhutto, had presented the Secretary with an album
of photos from her first visit to Pakistan, in 1995, and a framed photo of Bhutto and her two sons with Clinton and
daughter Chelsea. ""It did bring tears to my eyes,"" Clinton said at the state dinner in her honor at the presidential palace,
""because I so admired your wife. She gave her life ..."" She faltered then, choking up, but quickly pulled herself together,
talking about the ""reasons why we do what we do — to provide opportunities for all.""
Clinton's first trip to Pakistan as First Lady in 1995 had been a transformative experience for her — the beginning, I
believe, of the•process that made her a plausible candidate for Secretary of State. I traveled with her on that trip; when
we set off, she seemed depressed and even more private than usual. The Democrats had cratered in the 1994
congressional elections, and she had been trounced in her efforts to enact a universal health care plan. It was a very
personal defeat; as Clinton traveled the country trying to sell the plan, crowds shouted her down and cursed her.
Privately she admitted she was shocked by the hatred. The trip to South Asia seemed a bit of a vacation — it was
Chelsea's spring break — but also a retreat to a more demure, First Lady–like role after two years as health care policy
czar, although it proceeded in a decidedly wonky, Hillarian fashion. Jackie Kennedy had gone to India and famously
ridden an elephant; Hillary Clinton traveled to five countries and packed her schedule with visits to NGOs.
""That was the greatest trip, just unbelievable,"" Clinton says now. We were sitting in her hotel suite the day after her
Jerusalem gaffe, the Secretary in an electric-blue shift rather than her usual formal jacket and pants. She was wearing
glasses and appeared rather freckly without her makeup. ""I guess that trip has animated and informed everything I've
done since,"" she said. She emerged from the trip reinvigorated, with a new mission. By the end of 1995, at the U.N.
Conference on Women in Beijing, the First Lady had propounded a new Clinton Doctrine: ""Women's rights are human
rights.""(See photos of Beijing's changing skyline.)
Clinton is not an easy interview. She is preternaturally cautious, a consequence of her Methodist propriety and 20 years
of insane public scrutiny. She does not like to talk about herself, but she did tell me one interesting story about Bhutto.
When her husband was governor of Arkansas, she and Bill and Chelsea visited London and stood on the sidewalk outside
Bhutto's hotel, waiting for the then Pakistani Prime Minister to arrive. ""She was wearing a yellow embroidered shalwar
kameez with a chiffon scarf. I was just a fan, standing on the sidewalk with everyone else. It was the only time I ever did
anything like that,"" Clinton says.
When Clinton and Bhutto met formally, on the first day of the 1995 trip, they hit it off immediately, in part because
Bhutto was also obsessed with the impact the Islamist tide was having on women and children. I remember asking
Bhutto that day what the biggest change in her country had been over the past 25 years, and she said, ""I used to be able
to walk down the street wearing jeans, without a headscarf. Now I can't."" When I asked her why, she said — bluntly —
""The Saudis,"" who had been aggressively funding religious schools. Of course, Bhutto's acquiescence to, and
participation in, the general corruption of the Pakistani government was part of the reason public schools were so
inadequate and madrasahs became popular. (See photos from the aftermath of Benazir Bhutto's assassination in 2007.)
Ironically, the rise of Sunni extremist groups like al-Qaeda has brought Clinton's interests — microfinance, education and
health care — to the center of national-security policy for the first time. The impetus came not from the State
Department but from the military, where counterinsurgency doctrine demanded that social services in war zones -
schools, justice, economic development — reinforce the military's efforts to secure the population. As a result, there
was immediate chemistry between Clinton and General David Petraeus, author of the Army's counterinsurgency
manual, who became one of her prime military mentors when she served on the Senate Armed Services Committee. At
one point, well before Obama made his presidential intentions known, I asked Petraeus if there was any potential
Democratic candidate who understood how his mind worked, and he said, ""You mean, aside from Hillary?""
It was Clinton who brought together Petraeus and Holbrooke (""my two alpha males,"" she calls them) for the first time -
at her home in Washington on the Friday before the Obama Inauguration. The affection and respect she gained for the
military while serving in the Senate has helped make the relationship between State and the Pentagon less fraught than
usual — although Defense Secretary Gates' insistence on the need for bigger State Department budgets hasn't hurt. In
fact, relations with the Pentagon have gone smoother, at times, than Clinton's relationship with the White House staff.
Clinton was particularly irritated by the ridiculously strict vetting process that thwarted her favored candidate for USAID
director, Paul Farmer, from getting the job. ""It was all sorts of niggling things,"" says a Clinton adviser, ""like, Farmer had
at one point brought more than $10,000 in cash into Haiti. The money was for a needle-exchange program, but the
amount was illegal.""
Another of Clinton's military mentors, retired General Jack Keane, once told me, ""I'm a Republican. I disagree with her
about practically everything, but she'd make a hell of a Commander in Chief."" There is a palpable toughness to the
woman, a hard edge that contrasts with the President's instinctive impulse toward conciliation. One of the sharpest
exchanges of the presidential campaign came when Obama accused Clinton of echoing the ""bluster"" of George W. Bush
after she said the U.S. would be able to ""obliterate"" Iran if it used nuclear weapons against Israel. Clinton's edgier tone
has been evident from the start of the Administration: she took a sharper position than the President on an Israeli
settlement freeze by claiming, in May, that Obama wanted ""to see a stop to settlements. Not some settlements, not
outposts, not natural-growth exceptions."" And then, in Jerusalem, her use of the word unprecedented seemed a
rhetorical leap beyond the No Drama ground rules.(Read ""Clinton's Collateral Damage."")
The White House was not entirely thrilled with either statement. But then the White House staff is several steps
removed from a negotiating process. The Palestinians are weak and divided. The Israelis have been difficult, as always:
whenever Mitchell raises East Jerusalem in talks with the Israeli Foreign Minister, the Israeli stands up and walks out of
the room. Despite Netanyahu's momentary, tactical enthusiasm for peace talks, his Likud Party has always favored the
de facto incorporation of Palestinian lands into the state of Israel.
Hillary's Choice
The tensions between the White House and State raise a fascinating question going forward. Obama and Clinton are in
substantive agreement on the President's diplomacy-first philosophy and on most policy issues — although neither is
willing to disclose the content of their private conversations — but style often predicts substance in foreign policy;
neither Obama's gauziness nor Clinton's inconsistent bluntness overseas seems particularly solid. There is a growing
perception that the Administration's policies have been thwarted across the board: Afghanistan is a mess, Iran seems
ready to scuttle the nuclear negotiations, there's no progress in the Middle East, the Syrians and North Koreans remain
recalcitrant, the Russians have been offered a freebie on missile defense, and the Chinese have been given a pass on
human rights with no apparent quid pro quos.
The White House argues that some progress has been made: Iran is on the defensive, and North Korea has said it will
return to the six-party talks. Clinton argues, correctly, about the need for ""strategic patience."" But the only thing Obama
really has to show for his efforts so far is a Nobel Prize for Potential and — no small thing — the wisdom to have
refrained from doing anything so wildly stupid as invading Iraq. The President has been willing to use military force -
the Predator drones that have decimated al-Qaeda's leadership testify to his lack of squeamishness — but this
Administration is supposed to be about the efficacy of using subtler expressions of.U.S. power. That doesn't happen
overnight, but for Obama's policies to be considered a success, it has to happen sooner or later, in a way that can be
explained to the public.
There is also a growing sense that the President's inexperience is beginning to show — not in his overall policy, which
represents the views of a broad, moderate national-security consensus ranging from Brent Scowcroft to John Kerry, but
in his execution of the details. The Afghan strategy review has been too public and taken too long; the Middle East peace
hunt has become a wild goose chase. A letter to Iran's Supreme Leader is a productive gesture only if it gets a response;
if it doesn't, it seems weak and supplicatory. A call for the Israelis to freeze settlements is effective only if it is
accompanied by the credible threat of a reduction in aid. ""You can't be seen pushing countries around — demanding
[that] Israel freeze settlements, demanding that Hamid Karzai reform his government — and not get results,"" says Leslie
H. Gelb, author of Power Rules. ""The leaders of these countries are tough, successful politicians, and they'll begin to take
you less seriously."" (See photos from the 1979 revolution in Iran.)
Clinton is unwilling to acknowledge these problems, and her staff is loath to admit her occasional mistakes. Her praise
for the President is fulsome, and aides say the relationship with Obama really — really — is strong. But there are also
burblings and emanations from Clinton's staff and friends, Foggy Bottom body language, that suggest there is a need for
the Administration to produce a second act after the Rodney King phase. And the White House is perplexed by the
uncharacteristic lack of discipline indicated by Clinton's occasional overseas gaffes.
These tensions are well within the boundaries of normal, creative policymaking. There is absolutely no indication that
the Secretary is frustrated to the point of jumping ship — or returning to politics as a candidate for governor of New
York, as has been rumored. Quite the contrary, she seems intent on making history as Secretary of State. To do that,
though, she will have to have the same authority at home as she has abroad. She will have to become the President's
primary foreign policy voice. Over the first nine months of the Obama Administration, seven different Obama officials
have spoken on the Sunday talk shows about foreign policy. Clinton has been on each of the Sunday shows once. ""Either
you have one person sending the foreign policy message, with the clear approval of the President,"" says a former
Republican Secretary of State, ""or there is no message.""(See photos from eight months of Obama's diplomacy.)
Aides to Obama say they would like to see her on the Sunday shows more often. (Indeed, Clinton's staff acknowledged
that she was asked to appear two additional times but was traveling and unable to do so.) Ultimately, though, television
is a metaphor for the larger questions that need to be resolved: How much can these former rivals — both extremely
guarded and private people — really trust each other; and, if not Clinton, who will emerge as the President's alter ego
on foreign policy? At this point, the strongest member of Obama's national-security team is Gates — but he's a
Republican and an unlikely spokesman or presidential confidant on anything beyond Pentagon issues. General Jim Jones
has settled in as National Security Adviser, but he's not a political animal — and every President needs a close foreign
policy adviser who understands the intersection of long-term strategy, politics and diplomatic chess.
Clinton's value to the Administration was clear in Pakistan. She wowed a public so skeptical that it had been questioning
the $7.5 billion in purely economic and humanitarian aid the Administration had promised. ""How much damage control
have you been able to do on this trip?"" asked Meher Bokhari, a television-news-show host, at the end of Clinton's
meeting with Pakistani women. The Secretary seemed nonplussed by the bluntness of the question. ""I don't know,"" she
said. ""I hope some.""
Afterward, I asked Bokhari to answer her own question. ""Well, this trip was long overdue,"" she said. ""The Pakistani
people really needed to talk to an American about our concerns — the strings attached to aid programs, the drone
attacks, their history of support for the military dictatorship. And it needs to be followed up. But if you ask me about the
damage control"" — she paused, thinking it through — ""I'd have to say a lot. She accomplished a lot.""
In the end, though, Clinton's success will be determined by whether she can expand her role beyond public diplomat.
She will have to become a more sure-handed negotiator and, most important, a trusted adviser to a President who
knows where he wants to go in the world but hasn't quite figured out how to get there."
3154,Nice!
3155,fyi
3156,Of course. Will do
3157,Yes
3158,"PIR <preines
Thursday, November 5, 2009 7:09 AM
H; millscd@state.gov; balderstonkm@state.gov; toivnf@state.gov; crowleypj@state.gov
Re: Ed Luce article
At Boeing in Moscow, Jake and I sold Janine Zacharia of Bloomberg on looking at your Commercial Diplomacy efforts -
and this is one of the things she's basing it on. So we should be seeing that in the next weeks, and I think it will trigger
other US press to follow, or at least absorb. That's our hope and plan anyway.
On 11/5/09, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> Great article. Thx to all. I'm copying RI and Philippe to see if they
> can it into US press coverage of us and our efforts.
>"
3159,"sbwhoeop
Thursday, November 5, 2009 10:18 AM
H
FYI: has some valuable info on af/pak. Sid
tittp://www.qpi.corn/Ton NewsiAnalvsis/2009111104/Corranentary-Wariords-R-UsitiP1-16551?57351379/
ornment- Nanot T i s
u
ARNAUD DE BORCHGRAVE
UPI Editor at Large
WASHINGTON, Nov. 4 (UPI) -- If we are successful beyond President Obama's wildest dreams -- e.g., the
Taliban is wiped out and a tough new Afghan government does not allow al-Qaida or other terrorists to conspire
against us on their territory -- would that make us safer from radical Islam? The answer, of course, is no,
because this is riot about geography. Two veteran intelligence operatives with much Middle Eastern and Afghan
experience, speaking not for attribution, agreed a stable, secure Afghanistan doesn't change the equation, at least
not significantly.
The popular perception of al-Qaida in Afghanistan is the same propaganda news clip, shown a gazillion times
over the last eight years, replete with terrorist ""trainees"" in shalwar-kameez (knee-length shirts over baggy
pantaloons) running through obstacle courses and emerging from tunnels, presumably to kill us all in our beds.
Al-Qaida doesn't need commando-steeled volunteers to attack the United States and its allies. For the next Sept.
11, the chances are they have already selected highly motivated, brainwashed wackjobs among the graduates of
Pakistan's madrassas, who look forward to a one button push to the land of plenty in the sky where 72 impatient
maidens await their arrival. Al-Qaida's ""martyrs"" don't need Afghan training camps for WMD terrorism. In fact,
to be inconspicuous, they should not have the physique of an avoid-at-all-cost likely to arouse suspicion.
Al-Qaida does not need Afghanistan for its next terrorist objective. In fact, those who follow events in
Afghanistan closely were taken aback when Obama said Afghanistan was a war of necessity because that's
where al-Qaida. is. They haven't been there since Afghanistan was liberated in October 2001. They moved to
Pakistan's tribal areas where they attracted volunteers from the Middle East and Europe. When a reconstituted
Taliban insurgent force re-entered Afghanistan in large numbers in 2004, al-Qaida was not interested in its now
insecure old training camps. Even if Pakistan's current offensive.against the Taliban and al-Qaida in the tribal
areas is successful, al-Qaida is not an entity that can be captured or destroyed. Its clandestine operatives are
widely scattered in the Middle East, Africa, Europe, North and South America.
As alternatives to Afghanistan and Pakistan, Yemen, in the vernacular of the intelligence community, will do/is
doing it. Somalia will do/is doing it. West African states whose writ doesn't extend much beyond their capitals
will do/are doing it. Grimy North African suburbs of major French cities will do/are doing it. British provincial
towns with Pakistani enclaves will do/are doing it. And the Internet's thousands of pro-al-Qaida Web sites will
do/are doing it.
Osama bin Laden and his deputy Ayman al-Zawahiri are believed to be comfortably installed in a tribal chiefs
compound somewhere near Quetta, the capital of Pakistan's constantly rebellious Baluchistan province, which
has 48 percent of the country's land with. only 10 million of its 175 million people. There is no al-Qaida central
issuing orders to thousands of adherents the world over.
If the:re is no connection between Afghanistan and the core problem of ""no more Sept. lls,"" what are the United
States and 41 friendly nations doing there? Even in the event of a Taliban victory in the years to come, the
Taliban would not be stupid enough to invite al-Qaida back. Three months prior to Sept. 11, 2001, there was
palpable tension between Taliban leader Mullah Omar and bin Laden. Omar complained that bin Laden was
issuing ""too many fatwas (religious edicts) which he has no business doing as he didn't complete his religious
education."" Omar also prevented journalists from seeing bin Laden. The Taliban leader knows he lost power
and his country because of what bin Laden and his terrorists did to the United States.
In today's Afghanistan almost everything turns out to be corruption and mismanagement. The average citizen
has seen little benefit from expenditures in the $250 billion range -- on top of $1 trillion in Iraq. The .U.S. effort
has been plagued by fraud, laced with mismanagement and bereft of strategic focus. One example among many
others came in 2007 when the United States awarded a massive contract worth some $300 million to A:EY, a
Florida-based company, to supply the Afghan army with 52 types of ammo, chiefly bullets for AK-47s. All
requirements for safety inspections, mandatory for all ammo delivered to U.S. forces, were removed. Thus AEY
was able to shop around in Eastern Europe for the cheapest ammo available. Millions of rounds of old Chinese
ammo made in the 1960s turned out to be substandard. and dangerous.
The State Department was aware of what was going on but did not object as speed was the only criterion. AEY
and its officers were eventually indicted in Florida. But U.S. officials involved got off with a slap on the wrist.
Wherever U.S. inspectors look, they find fraud and abuse. There are even cases -- reported by GlobalPost
reporter Jean Mackenzie -- of American contractors paying bribes to the Taliban to ensure aid projects are not
disrupted. This is a recipe for a war without end. She also reports a disguised Taliban office in Kabul that
reviews all aid projects and determines the amount to be paid to the Taliban.
If true, the United States is paying the Afghan government to fight the Taliban while also paying the Taliban to
fight the Afghan government.
The key lies in Pakistan. Almost all terrorist trails in Europe lead back to Pakistan -- and its madrassas. These
are the free Koranic schools that have stepped into the vacuum of no education system for the poor as the
military takes up 50 percent of government revenue. A fraction of what the United States has spent in Iraq and
Afghanistan would go a long way to turning Pakistan around. Instead, Congress, in its infinite wisdom, after
authorizing $1.2 trillion in both wars allocated $7.5 billion to Pakistan over five years -- with umpteen caveats.
In a country of 175 million, a drop in the proverbial bucket."
3160,"sbwhoeop
Thursday, November 5, 2009 10:51 AM
H
In case no one shows you this from Foreign Policy today. Sid
http://thecable.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2009/11/04/experts_call_for_further_national_security_reform
Report: Obama's national security team
'incredibly weak'
Wed, 11/04/2009 - 1:45pm
Despite an expansion of the National Security Council staff, coordination of national security policy is still dysfunctional
and there is a lack of strategic guidance from President Obama, according to a group of leading outside experts and
former officials.
""Reform must take place,"" said dames Lalher, President & CEO of the r!-olect on n; alone! Security Reform (PNSR), If
you did not like what happened in the last 7 or 8 years... you're not going to like what's coming in the future.""
""Momentum for reform is building, but it is largely rhetoric and good intentions,"" reads PNSR's .new report . The
congressionally funded group was begun as the result of a cooperative agreement between the Defense Department and
the Office of the Director of National Intelligence. ""Strategic management of the national security system remains absent
and is desperately needed to make it integrated, cohesive, and agile,"" the report continues.
Calling reform of the national security infrastructure ""the number one national security issue,"" Locher said that America's
ability to operate in international arenas the world over is ""crippled"" by the dysfunction within the system.
He called the White House's national security staff ""incredibly weak,"" preventing integration and coordination
that the National Security Council should be doing.
""There's almost no strategic guidance from the president or the executive office of the president,"" Locher said,
adding, ""We have almost no knowledge management in the national security system.""
There's also no effective means for delegating the president's authority, he added.
Locher spoke a an event rolling out the latest PNSR report at the New American Foundation; hosted by its foreign policy
chief and editor of V/gst1inc.Vgz? N.DtL:9 Steve Clemons.
Clemons noted that according to the Goldwater-Nichols act, President Obama was required to submit a national security
strategy by June 18, 150 days into his presidency, but he failed to do so.
The ""Guiding Coalition"" that oversaw the PNSR report included heavyweights such as former Lockheed Martin CEO
Norman Augustine, former Amb. Robert Blackwill, retired Gen. Wesley Clark, retired Adm. Ed Giambastiani, former
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, former Director of National Intelligence Mike McConnell, plus Washington players Brent
Scowcroft, Thomas Pickering, and Joseph Nye.
Last November's version of the PNSR report included input from now Obama officials Jim Jones, James Steinberg,
Michele Flournoy, and Dennis Blair. It declared that ""the national security of the United States of America is
fundamentally at risk."""
3161,"MS — Apologies for the late notice on this, but I just heard that today is
•
U"
3162,From Lula Davis regarding Shannon and Valenzuela. Thanks for calling DeMint. It made the difference.
3163,"MS,
WJC just called for you (5:27 PM).
Lauren"
3164,"sbwhoeop
Thursday, November 5, 2009 6:07 PM
H
Imuscatine Su II iva nJJ @state.gov
Memo: Berlin speeches Sid
hrc berlin speech notes 110509.docx
November 5, 2009-11-05
For Hillary:"
3166,"sbwhoeop
Thursday, November 5, 2009 6:17 PM
H
Also want to credit John KoMblum, Bill Drozdiak and Ted Widmer, all of whom I
consulted. Sid"
3167,"RELEASE IN PART
B6
The Berlin event is personally meaningful for me, not least because I was, in 1986, when I was a reporter for the
Washington Post, detained and held in a cell inside the Berlin Wall, after spending a night with dissidents in the east (who
wound up being the leaders of New Forum and overthrew the regime). Have fun at the AdIon (William Shirer's old haunts).
Cheers, Sid"
3168,The speechwriting crew is taking Sid's points below and massaging them into a set of remarks.
3170,"Tomicah, with Sid continuing to collaborate."
3172,"consulted. Sid
Will do. To whom should I send addresses? Lauren? Huma?"
3173,Fyi
3176,"I ran into Charlie in NY this week. He talked about his upcoming interview with you. He said he wanted to focus a lot on
China. That he will be in Berlin will help focus him, too, on the transatlantic relationship, which I would also bring up if he
doesn't. Sid"
3177,FYI
3178,"Millennium Challenge Corporation
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
November 6, 2009
President Obama Taps Cassandra Butts to Serve as Senior Advisor at the
Millennium Challenge Corporation
WASHINGTON - Today, President Barack Obama announced that he will name Deputy White
House Counsel Cassandra Q. Butts as Senior Advisor in the Office of the Chief Executive Officer at
the Millennium Challenge Corporation.
President Obama said, ""I am honored to appoint my dear friend and trusted colleague Cassandra to
serve in this important role. The Millennium Challenge Corporation is an essential partner as we
work to combat global poverty, and Cassandra brings a depth of experience and true passion for
justice that will be invaluable to its success in the future. I am grateful for Cassandra's tireless service
in this administration and look forward to continuing to work with her in the years ahead.""
President Obama made the following announcement today:
Cassandra Q. Butts, Senior Advisor, Office of the Chief Executive Officer, Millennium Challenge
Corporation
Cassandra Butts is currently the Deputy White House Counsel where she has focused on judicial
nominations. Ms. Butts was the general counsel to the Obama-Biden Transition Project. She also
served as the Senior Vice President for Domestic Policy at the Center for American Progress. Prior to
joining CAP, she was a senior advisor to House Democratic Leader Richard A. Gephardt (D-MO)
where she worked on refugee, asylum and immigration issues and served as the policy director on
his 2004 presidential campaign. Ms. Butts also served as director of Senator Obama's Senate
transition in 2004-2005. Previously, she was an Assistant Counsel for the NAACP Legal Defense &
Educational Fund and also served as Legislative Counsel to Senator Harris L. Wofford (D-PA). Ms.
Butts was an international election observer to the Zimbabwean parliamentary elections in 2000. She
is a graduate of Harvard Law School and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
###"
3179,Thanks! See you then and in the meantime happy trails and I'll send notes along the way
3181,Will do.
3183,"WASHINGTON (CNN) — Fewer than three in 10 Americans think Sarah Palin's qualified to be president, according to a
new national poll - the least of any of the five potential candidates included in the survey.
But another woman tops that list in the CNN/Opinion Research Corporation survey released Monday: two-thirds of the
public thinks that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's qualified for the Oval Office. That's more than Vice President Joe
Biden, who's currently next in line for the presidency.
According to the poll, 28 percent of Americans say Palin is qualified to run the White House, with seven in 10 saying the
former Alaska governor and 2008 Republican vice presidential nominee is not qualified.
The survey indicates that a majority of Republicans, 54 percent, feel Palin is qualified, with 44 percent indicating she
isn't. But only 29 percent of independent voters questioned feel she is qualified to serve as president, with 68 percent
disagreeing. According to the poll, nine in 10 Democrats feel Palin is not qualified.
The poll's release comes one day before the release of Palin's book, ""Going Rogue: An American Life.""
""The perception that Palin is not qualified to be president puts her significantly behind two potential rivals for the GOP
nomination in 2012 - Mitt Romney and Mike Huckabee,"" says CNN Polling Director Keating Holland.
According to the survey, nearly half of all Americans think Romney is qualified to be president, with 43 percent feeling
the same way about Huckabee. Among Republicans, Palin is still lagging other potential 2012 primary candidates: 63
percent of GOPers think that Romney and Huckabee are qualified, 9 points higher than the number that say the same of
Palin.""
Palin has many strengths - recent CNN polls indicate that Americans believe that she is not a typical politician, that she
cares about average Americans, and that she is honest and trustworthy,"" says Holland. ""But the perception that she is
not qualified for the White House is her biggest Achilles heel.""An ABC News/Washington Post poll also released Monday
indicates that 38 percent of Americans say Palin's qualified to serve as president, with six in 10 saying she's not qualified.
The CNN survey indicates that 67 percent of people questioned say that Clinton is qualified to serve in the Oval Office,
17 points higher than the 50 percent of Americans who think that Biden's qualified to take over as president.Biden's low
number may be attributable to negative feelings about the Obama/Biden administration rather than views of Biden
personally.""
In the past, poll respondents who dislike an administration have sometimes taken it out on the vice president,"" say
Holland. Polls from the late 1990s showed that Americans felt Al Gore was qualified to be president, but only if
respondents were given the chance to say something negative about Gore that was unrelated to his qualifications, he
adds. In the Bush administration, the number who thought Dick Cheney was qualified to be president dropped as the
administration grew more unpopular. ""Cheney's experience in office didn't change during that period - attitudes toward
the Bush/Cheney administration did,"" he says.
Hillary Clinton also has the advantage of having been able to stay out of domestic policy debates, including health care,
the economic stimulus, and other controversial matters, while adding almost daily to her experience in foreign policy,
Holland adds, while Biden has been involved in the domestic policy disputes - ""which might explain why some
respondents were looking for a reason to say something negative about the veep.""
The CNN/Opinion Research Corporation poll was conducted November 13-15, with 1,014 adult Americans questioned by
telephone. The survey's sampling error is plus or minus 3 percentage points for the overall sample."
3184,I will prepare for you to sign upon your return. Safe travels!
3185,"I'm writing in the hope that when you're in Afghanistan you will be able to demonstrate in some public way your support
for the Afghan women. There is much disillusionment over the aftermath of the elections and the ongoing violence. It
would be a wonderful signal to the women that we do value the role that they are and must continue to play to move
Afghanistan forward.
Secondly, it would also be helpful because there is growing concern at home that the women are going to be abandoned.
I have to meet with Sen. Casey tom'w, for example. He believes that the women are critical to stability and peace in
Afghanistan and wants to discuss our commitment.
Lastly, as Pres, Karzai is beginning to plan his cabinet, perhaps you could mention to him the need to bring in some of the
talented and experienced women into his government. At our Shura meeting yesterday, we discussed upcoming
ministerial positions. We, of course, have no guarantee that Karzai will listen, but his government would be a lot better if
he tapped women and so many are highly qualified.
Thanks."
3187,"Importance:
FYI
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Wednesday, November 18, 2009 8:17 AM
H
Fw: Rendez-vous in Kabul....
High
B6"
3188,fyi
3189,"Your arrival in Kabul landed the front page picture in the NYT and sparked an on-line poll in Huff Post about your coat. At
last check, its favorability rating was 77 percent. Safe travels back. PJ"
3190,Now I now why Huma has been at a computer all day clicking the mouse incessantly
3193,"Think your calls to House members made all the difference. Close, but good result. Reid still waiting on cbo scoring
before taking up senate bill. Could slide at least a week, maybe more."
3194,"I know you're embarked on another big trip and wish you well.
I met with Reema Navatany, Ela Bhatt's right hand, whom you know. She sends her greetings and underscored again
what you mean to them. SEWA is on the cutting edge of so many exciting developments.
We had a great conversation on many things, including how much women in the developing world can and must do to
address climate change and drive low tech green industries. In the villages, I could feel the pollution in my eyes and
throat -- so much needs to be done at the local level. Much pollution is produced because of the way women cook, etc.
When I get back, will work up some ideas on this. Delhi's been enshrouded in smog for the last couple days.
The SEWA project I visited 2 hours outside of Delhi was so impressive. Women who were among the poorst of the poor
had become businesswomen capable of traveling to London and Brussels to negotiate contracts with companies for
their embroidery etc We're going to have SEWA play a key role in the Vital Voices summit that you announced that will
take place here next year.
Maria Otero was still here when - arrived so she joined me for the SEWA mtgs.
I also went to one of Rushira Gupta's antitrafficking projects. You know her as we've been working with her thru WH
years. She got the global citizens award at CGI this year. I don't think I've seen worse conditions than what she's trying to
address. In Mumbai we launched an anti- trafficking campaign with Bollywood which brought in new players to the
cause.
Tomw, I will be speaking on this year's World Economic Forum Gender Gap report for India. There's so much potential
for India's economic growth -- as the WEF points out --- if they'd tap women's potential here. India is last of the BRIC
countries on most indicators and comes out poorly generally. Will be raising some of these issues with govt in Dialogue
mtgs.
Anyway, I thought of you so much everywhere I went. I'm so happy to be part of your legacy on these issues.
Travel well."
3195,"Below please find the list of those 39 Democrats who voted against the H.3962 (The Affordable Health Care for America
Act).
Bobby Bright, Alabama District 2-Montgomery
Parker Griffith, Alabama District 5-Huntsville
Artur Davis, Alabama District 7-Birmingham (retiring)
Mike Ross, Arkansas District 4-Prescott
Betsy Markey, Colorado District 4-Fort Collins
Allen Boyd, Florida District 2-Monticello
Suzanne Kosmas, Florida District 24-New Smyrna Beach
Jim Marshall, Georgia District 8-Macon
John Barrow, Georgia District 12-Savannah
Walt Minnick, Idaho District 1-Boise
Ben Chandler, Kentucky District 6-Versailles
Charles Melancon, Louisiana District 3-Napoleonville (retiring)
Frank Kratovil, Maryland District 1-Stevensville
Collin Peterson, Minnesota District 7-Detroit Lakes
Travis Childers, Mississippi District 1-Booneville
Gene Taylor, Mississippi District 4-Bay St. Louis
Ike Skelton, Missouri District 4-Lexington
John Adler, New Jersey District 3-Cherry Hill
Harry Teague, New Mexico District 2-Hobbs
Michael McMahon, New York District 13-Staten Island
Scott Murphy, New York District 20-Glens Falls
Eric Massa, New York District 29-Corning
Mike McIntyre, North Carolina District 7-Lumberton
Larry Kissel!, North Carolina District 8-Biscoe
Heath Shuler, North Carolina District 11-Waynesville
Dennis Kucinich, Ohio District 10-Cleveland
John Boccieri, Ohio District 16-Alliance
Dan Boren, Oklahoma District 2-Muskogee
Jason Altmire, Pennsylvania District 4-McCandless
Tim Holden, Pennsylvania District 17-Saint Clair
Stephanie Herseth Sandlin, South Dakota At Large Member-Brookings
Lincoln Davis, Tennessee District 4-Pall Mall
Bart Gordon, Tennessee District 6-Murfreesboro
John Tanner, Tennessee District 8-Union City
Chet Edwards, Texas District 17-Waco
Jim Matheson, Utah District 2-Salt Lake City
Glenn Nye, Virginia District 2-Norfolk
Rick Boucher, Virginia District 9-Abingdon
Brian Baird, Washington District 3-Vancouver"
3196,"November 8, 2009
For: Hillary"
3197,"Assume you're in Berlin. Holbrooke just dazzled &, in some key cases, mollified, even persuaded Trilateral Commission re
Afpak. It was off-record. I strongly feel he & others shd be out there publicly establishing the theory of the case, not
least because that will help manage the delay before the Pres's decision/announcement.
Safe travels & hi to Gorby (just kidding--he regards me as a Yeltsinite)"
3198,K
3199,"Many thx for your kind note. I wish I felt better about Iraqis as a result, but I truly remain worried about these people.
They are truly a collective pain in the neck. Chris
This e-mail is unclassified based on the definitions outlined in E.O. 12958
*** Sent from my BlackBerry Wireless Handheld ***"
3203,"You can't email Huma when she's in the same room, I set it to be loud & grating when you do!"
3204,"As a reminder, ehud barak called for you. Call sheet just came through. Its at house.
Also, pdb coming at 10am."
3205,Can we find out more?
3206,"RELEASE IN PART
B6
FYI"
3208,"November 09, 2009
Samuel J. Heyman, who stood out as a corporate raider who preferred to hold on to companies he bought and run them
rather that sell them for a quick profit, died Sunday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan. He was 70.
Mr. Heyman's death was confirmed by his wife, Ronnie, who said he had died after complications from open heart
surgery.
Mr. Heyman was most recently chairman of the GAF Corporation, a manufacturer of roofing materials, and a chemical
company that was spun off from GAF, called International Specialty Products. Both companies are based in Wayne, N.J.
A group led by Mr. Heyman bought GAF in 1983 and took it private in 1987 after the stock market crashed. He later spun
off GAF's chemical business into a separate company, I.S.P.
During that period, corporate raiders tended to buy companies, cut operational costs and then sell them at a profit. But
after Mr. Heyman won a battle with GAF's management for control of the company, he told The New York Times: ""There
is a very strong potential in chemicals, and we plan to make them grow.""
Mr. Heyman, who was also a lawyer, had diverse business holdings, including Heyman Properties, which owns shopping
malls in the Northeast and which grew out of a business he had inherited from his father.
""He was extremely methodical. There was a rhyme and reason to everything he did,"" said Leon Black, the chairman of
Apollo Management, a private equity firm, and a longtime friend who was once Mr. Heyman's investment banker.
Mr. Black added: ""He combined a strong legal background with a strong analytical business strength, and he was a fierce
negotiator. But what really made Sam kick was that he was a builder. It was all about building, whether it was his
companies, his real estate, his art collection or his family.""
Mr. Heyman was born March 1, 1939, in Danbury, Conn., to Annette and Lazarus Heyman. His father was a real estate
developer. After graduating from Yale in 1960 and Harvard Law School in 1964, Mr. Heyman went to work in the Justice
Department under Robert F. Kennedy and served as chief assistant United States attorney for Connecticut. He had to cut
that career short when his father needed him to take over the real estate development business.
Mr. Heyman made his biggest mark in the 1983 battle for GAF. A group of shareholders led by Mr. Heyman became
frustrated by management's resistance to selling some of its biggest assets, including the chemicals business.
Mr. Heyman waged an aggressive campaign against the company's chairman and ultimately forced his removal through
a shareholder vote - a rare victory for shareholders during a time when executives of public companies were considered
virtually untouchable.
Once Mr. Heyman took control of GAF, he reversed course and held on to the chemicals business, ultimately making it a
big contributor to the company's profit.
He also moved quickly to cut costs and revamp the business, saying at the time that he was an ""impatient man. When I
see a place where money can be saved, I don't waste time.""
Mr. Heyman also gave away money. In 1999, he founded the Partnership for Public Service, which provides fellowships
to encourage students to pursue careers in public service. For his charity work, Mr. Heyman won the President's Citizens
Award in 2008.
His other philanthropic interests included the establishment of the Samuel and Ronnie Heyman Center on Corporate
Governance at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law.
He and his wife also collected art. Among their holdings are works by Mark Rothko and Jackson Pollock.
In addition to his wife, the former Ronnie Feuerstein, Mr. Heyman is survived by his mother, Annette Heyman of Palm
Beach, Fla.; four children, Lazarus Heyman, Eleanor Propp, Jennifer Millstone and Elizabeth Winter; and nine
grandchildren."
3210,"RELEASE IN PART
B6
fyi"
3213,FYI. Craig is on his way to Honduras now.
3214,"Its midnight here.
U have someone coming at 7.
We don't need to leave till 8:15 or 8:30.
Will do pre-brief in am
I'm coming up now."
3215,FYI. How did it go in Berlin? Looked terrific. What does Merkel think of the Blair option? Sid
3216,"We are doing letter
Also have a number if you want to call
Wjc is supposed to call as well."
3217,Confirmed wjc still in dem caucus lunch
3218,"ill Ex-Gates Foundation exec named foreign aid chief
Obama administration picks former Gates Foundation official to run US foreign aid
By MATTHEW LEE
Associated Press
ij 11-10-2009 13:46
11 SINGAPORE (AP) _ The Obama administration will nominate a young former executive with the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation to run America's top foreign assistance program, ending months of speculation
and complaints about who would take the vacant post, U.S. officials said Tuesday.
$ President Barack Obama has chosen Rajiv Shah, a medical doctor and currently a senior official at the
Department of Agriculture dealing with food security, to run the U.S. Agency for International
Development, the officials said.
¶ The officials spoke on condition of anonymity pending notification to Congress and a formal public
announcement of the choice.
11 Shah's selection, which must still be confirmed by the Senate, would end a 10-month leadership
vacuum at USAID, which has been operating with an acting director since Obama took office despite his
campaign pledges to have the agency play a greater role in foreign policy.
11 Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton have said USAID is crucial to deploying their
preferred ""smart power"" foreign policy strategy, which envisions more equal roles for diplomacy and
development alongside defense. They plan to double the amount of foreign aid.
11 The agency will play a key role in the administration's efforts in Afghanistan and Pakistan, where
officials believe the civilian component must be strengthened.
$ But the top job at the agency has remained vacant until now, with several prime candidates'
withdrawing from consideration amid a White House vetting process that Clinton denounced in July as
""ridiculous,"" ""a nightmare,"" and ""frustrating beyond words.""
$ Shah, 36, whose family immigrated to the U.S. from India, is now the Under Secretary for Research,
Education and Economics and Chief Scientist at the Agriculture Department where he manages a budget
of more than $2.6 billion and more than 10,000 staff around the world.
¶ Before that, he had several positions at the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, including managing its
$1.5 billion contribution to a global vaccination fund and helping launch the foundation's Global
Development program where he oversaw a $1.3 billion investment portfolio.
The lingering USAID vacancy, particularly after several leading candidates pulled out, had upset
development experts and Congress. Some lawmakers had suggested that Obama choose someone who
had already gone through the vetting process.
¶ Shah fits that bill and has important political credentials, having worked with or for several leading
Democratic politicians.
il"
3219,"We're getting ready to get a lot of these — I think not b/c it defeats the purpose of having A/S and others meet and get
to know each other."
3221,Not yet.
3222,"I also haven't been able to get any further details, but will continue to work on it. It hasn't been in the press yet.
The home number is
I'll add to your call grid."
3223,"Tutu:
Gail Collins:
I'm working on addresses for both, and will all of the below to your call grid. I'll send an updated grid to Huma within
the hour.
The Gail Collins book will be on your desk when you return."
3224,"Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.gov>
Tuesday, November 10, 2009 5:12 PM
H
RE: A death in family
I added these numbers to your grid, too:
Working on getting more details."
3225,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, November 10, 2009 5:36 PM
H
FW: Congrats on USAID
USAID Administrator Nominee 11'10'09.pdf"
3227,B6
3229,"All did some quiet digging
See Ali's note below.
She wasn't able to get specifics, but it sounds as though it"
3230,Another note from milliband that he doesn't want to send through the system.
3231,"And just to underscore, this info is not public, and it seems"
3232,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, November 21, 2009 4:55 PM
H
Fw: Call to Chinese FM Yang
See below
Bill burns is asking if you would call yang
We can send you formal call sheet and set up call if you want."
3233,"Dear Hillary
Thanks for your encouragement on NATO. I am honored that you asked me to work on this fascinating challenge.
I leave for Slovenia tomorrow for the second seminar. I then go to Prague to celebrate the Velvet revolution. Will be in touch when I
get back with another update for you to have before the ministerial and then can figure out when we meet
All best
Madeleine
Sent using BlackBerry"
3234,Yes- they are both on.
3236,Tony blair asking if you are free to talk tomorrow (sunday) at 12:30?
3237,Do you still want this night (assuming also af/pak is that day?)
3238,"No word back from chinese on his availability.
Blair will be fine with that."
3239,-- we need to talk
3240,"H RC:
Here is background on the letter from Baucus and the anticipated response prepared by H.
Take a look and see if you want to go in a different direction.
Including the background below so you have the context for the letter."
3241,"This evening cloture was invoked on the motion to proceed to Majority Leader Reid's health care bill, 60 to 39.
It was a straight party line vote. Despite some early concern over how they would vote, Senators Ben Nelson, Landrieu,
and Lincoln voted with the caucus. Each has warned they're not a guaranteed ""yes"" vote on final passage.
Senators voted from their seats, and Senator Dodd sat in the chair during the vote. The vote was followed by brief
applause.
Per the UC agreement negotiated by Reid and McConnell, this evening's cloture vote will also double as the vote on the
underlying motion to proceed, meaning the Senate will recess after the vote and will be on the health care bill when it
returns from the Thanksgiving recess."
3243,"Senator Voinovich missed the vote.
I'm trying to find out if Leadership knew he was going to be missing or not. Although he is retiring, it's a little odd given
how historically significant the vote is."
3244,"Yang on travel
Not free tonite.
May work tomorrow"
3245,Richards office sending a secure fax tomorrow morning at 8:30am.
3246,"back -- we need to talk
calling"
3247,Tony blair is confirmed for 12:45 today. Ops will connect to house.
3248,FYI
3249,fyi
3251,"The Independent
November 12, 2009
sbwhoeop
Thursday, November 12, 2009 8:52 AM
H
FYI: Murdoch makes his move to Cameron. Attack on BBC to follow. Sid
Has Cameron done a deal with Murdoch?
By Andy McSmith
Lord Mandelson's attack shines spotlight on Tory leader's
links with media mogul
David Cameron has been accused of making a ""contract"" with Britain's biggest media company to trade political support
before an election for government favours afterwards if the Tories win.
The accusation was levelled yesterday by the Business Secretary Peter Mandelson, who is increasingly the public face of
Gordon Brown's government. Ministers are angry at the campaign that The Sun has run against the Prime Minister all this
week over the spelling mistakes in a letter Mr Brown sent to the mother of a young soldier killed in Afghanistan.
They suspect that the Conservative Party has been tailoring its policies on media regulation and the BBC to suit the
commercial interests of News International, which owns The Sun, and that the paper's aggressive support for the Tories is
a pay-off that could spread to other parts of the mass media.
Examples of the apparent tie-in between what News International's boss, James Murdoch, wants, and what David
Cameron is ready to promise include the recent decision by the Conservatives to abandon the idea of ""top slicing"" the
BBC licence fee. It had been proposed that part of the money paid to the BBC would be siphoned off to help regional
television companies meet the threat from the internet. But this would also have helped them compete more effectively
against Sky News, which is part of the Murdoch media empire.
When the policy was abandoned in September, Jeremy Hunt, the shadow Culture Secretary, said that it was because
enacting it might make the commercial television companies ""focus not on attracting viewers but on attracting subsidies"".
There was no gain for the BBC in the climbdown, because David Cameron had already said that the Tories will freeze the
licence fee. What it will mean is that the BBC's income will be capped, without the regional television companies seeing
any government help, which will strengthen the market position of Britain's only satellite television company, Sky. ""This
was done for News International,"" a Tory insider said yesterday. ""Murdoch wants Sky to go head to head with the BBC.
He doesn't want the independent companies strengthened.""
In April 2008, James Murdoch complained bitterly about the media regulator Ofcom in his first major speech after taking
over as chief executive of News Corporation in Europe and Asia. The following year, David Cameron announced that a
Conservative government would cut Ofcom down to size.
Last summer James Murdoch attacked the ""abysmal record"" of the BBC Trust - the body created by Labour to over see
the BBC - in a lecture he gave at the Edinburgh Festival, singling out its ""total failure"" to stop the BBC buying the Lonely
Planet travel guides, a takeover that Murdoch denounced as an ""egregious"" invasion of private enterprise by the state.
Less than two months later, Jeremy Hunt promised that the Tories would abolish the Trust.
In the same lecture, Murdoch complained that BBC performers like Jonathan Ross are being paid salaries that ""no
commercial competitor can afford"". He had barely uttered the words before Ed Vaizey, a shadow media minister,
promised that a Tory government would compel the BBC to publish the salaries of its top performers.
Lord Mandelson alleged yesterday that the Conservatives and News International had ""effectively formed a contract, over
the head, incidentally, of the newspaper's editor and their readers, in which they are sort of bound to one another"".
Speaking to the BBC's Today programme, he added: ""What The Sun can do for the Conservatives during the election is
one part of the contract and, presumably, what the Conservatives can do for News International if they are elected is the
other side of the bargain. But there is a wider question. When The Sun creates the news in this way, this is then followed
up by Sky News, which then puts pressure on the BBC to follow suit.""
This was ""absolutely, categorically"" denied yesterday by The Sun's political editor, Tom Newton Dunn, who accused Lord
Mandelson of talking ""preposterous nonsense"".
The Sun, which supported Labour through three general elections under Tony Blair's leadership, announced that it was
jumping ship on the day that Gordon Brown delivered his annual speech to the Labour Party conference in September.
Its onslaught on Gordon Brown for the mistakes made in a handwritten letter to Jacqui Janes is the most aggressive
attack that the newspaper has directed at any Labour Party leader since Neil Kinnock stood down after losing the 1992
general election, a defeat for which The Sun claimed victory with the slogan ""It was The Sun wot won it"".
But there were signs yesterday that the attack may have rebounded on The Sun. Mr Brown, who is blind in one eye, has
admitted that his handwriting is bad and has apologised to Mrs Janes, whose 20-year-old son, Jamie, was killed by a
makeshift bomb in Afghanistan last month.
A poll yesterday for the website PoliticsHome, whose main shareholder is the Conservative Party deputy chairman Lord
Ashcroft, found that 65 per cent of those polled thought that The Sun's attack was ""inappropriate"" compared with 23 per
cent who thought it was ""legitimate"".
The closeness of the new Tory-Sun axis is shown up by the revelation, from an inside source, that David Cameron
personally consulted the editor of The Sun, Dominic Mohan, in three separate conversations before he abandoned his
""cast-iron"" promise to hold a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty, now that all 27 members states of the EU have ratified it.
Mr Cameron was understandably wary of how The Sun might react to the abandonment of that promise. The paper has
campaigned for years against what it sees as the growth of an EU superstate. It was in an open letter to readers of The
Sun that Cameron first made his guarantee, two years ago.
His announcement that a referendum is off the agenda was subjected to a scathing attack in'the Daily Mail, but in The
Sun it was given kid-glove treatment under the headline ""Cameron's crusade for UK rights"".
The person behind this aggressively pro-Tory policy is James Murdoch, not his father, Rupert, who created The Sun
virtually from scratch in the 1970s. Rupert Murdoch claimed in an interview with Sky News Australia that he ""regretted"" his
son's decision to turn against Gordon Brown, ""who is a friend of mine"", but defended it on the grounds that Brown has
been a ""disappointment"".
Yesterday, The Times, another Murdoch newspaper, announced that its veteran political editor, Phil Webster, is leaving
the Commons, where he has been based for decades. Mr Webster is very well thought of by New Labour. His
replacement, Roland Watson, was a friend of David Cameron's at Eton but has no political ties with the Tories.
Tom Newton Dunn, newly appointed as The Sun's political editor, is another Old Etonian. His father, Bill, used to be a
Tory MEP, but defected to the Liberal Democrats in 2000.
Independent News and Media Limited"
3252,"Linda Dewan is out of the office/back on Monday, November 16"
3254,"November 12, 2009 - Dems Fade In Ohio Senate Race, Quinnipiac University Poll Finds; Obama Gets
Negative Score In Key Swing State
Word format
For the first time, Republican Rob Portman is inching ahead of the two Democrats in the 2010 race for Ohio's
U.S. Senate seat, according to a Quinnipiac University poll released today. Also for the first time, Ohio voters
disapprove 50 - 45 percent of the job President Barack Obama is doing, down from his 53 - 42 percent approval
September 16 and 49 - 44 percent approval July 7.
In still another first, voters are split 40 - 40 percent on who is doing a better job handling health care, the
President or Congressional Republicans, the independent Quinnipiac (KWIN-uh- pe-ack) University survey
finds. In a September 16 survey on the same question, Obama was on top 49 - 28 percent.
Ohio voters disapprove 53 - 42 percent of the way the President is handling the economy and disapprove 57 -
36 percent of the way he is handling health care. In September, they approved of his handling of the economy
48 - 46 percent and split on his handling of health care 44 - 45 percent.
""The Democratic wave that swept through Ohio in 2006 and 2008 may be cresting. The Democratic lead in the
Governor's and Senate races has evaporated and for the first time President Barack Obama is under water in the
most important swing state in the country,"" said Peter Brown, assistant director of the Quinnipiac University
Polling Institute.
""Ohio voters are not happy with the President's handling of health care and the economy. The fact that they now
are split whether he or the Republicans in Congress are better able to handle health care should be a very
worrisome number at 1600 Pennsylvania Ave. since the GOP is still pretty much a four-letter word in most of
America.""
Independent voters, often the group that decides Ohio elections, disapprove 49 - 45 percent of the overall job
Obama is doing and disapprove 54 - 39 percent of his handling of the economy. They disapprove 62 - 34
percent, almost 2-1, of his handling of health care.
""In July, when the President's job approval began falling nationally from the high 50s and low 60s into the low
50s, Ohio was the first place it showed up in the polls,"" said Brown.
Portman, a former Congressman running for the U.S. Senate in 2010, has small leads over two Democrats,
topping Secretary of State Jennifer Brunner 38 - 34 percent and Lt. Gov. Lee Fisher 39 - 36 percent. In the
battle for the Democratic Senate nomination, Fisher gets 24 percent to Brunner's 22 percent, with 51 percent
undecided. Portman leads car dealer Tom Ganley 26 - 7 percent in a GOP primary with 64 percent undecided.
""None of the Senate candidates are very well known, but what is significant is that until now Democrats were
winning all the Senate matchups. Clearly there is an at least temporary swing toward the GOP in Ohio. Whether
it continues is anyone's guess,"" said Brown.
Ohio voters oppose Obama's health care plan 55 - 36 percent, with independents against it 57 - 33 percent. By a
61 - 35 percent margin, voters don't think Congress should approve a health care overhaul if it only gets
Democratic votes.
But Ohio voters support 53 - 40 percent giving people the option of a government health insurance plan.
Independent voters support this public option 55 - 38 percent.
Afghanistan
The United States is doing the right thing fighting in Afghanistan, Ohio voters say 48 - 43 percent. Voters
support 51 - 40 percent the recommendations of the top U.S. commanders in Afghanistan that 40,000 more U.S.
troops should be sent.
""But 55 percent of Ohioans say they are only willing to see large numbers of American troops in Afghanistan
for two years or less, which is hardly a mandate for the type of long-term commitment that the Pentagon has
said will be needed for victory,"" said Brown.
From November 5 - 9, Quinnipiac University surveyed 1,123 Ohio voters, with a margin of error of +/- 2.9
percentage points. The survey includes 406 Republicans and 394 Democrats, each with a margin of error of +/-
4.9 percentage points.
The Quinnipiac University Poll, directed by Douglas Schwartz, Ph.D., conducts public opinion surveys in
Florida, Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Ohio and the nation as a public service and for
research. For more data or RSS feed- http://www.quinnipiac.edu/polling.xml, call (203) 582-5201, or follow us
on Twitter.
Sen. Christopher Dodd (D-CT) is still in serious trouble in his re-election race with 53% of voters saying he does not
deserve re-election, a new Quinnipiac poll finds.
Connecticut voters disapprove, 54% to 40%, of the job Dodd is doing, compared to a 49% to 43% disapproval in
September.
In general election match ups, Dodd loses to both Rob Simmons (R), 49% to 38%, and to Linda McMahon (R), 43% to
41%."
3256,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, November 22, 2009 10:44 AM
H
FW:
FYI"
3257,Just tried you - went to vox - calling ops
3259,"Also, assume you are giving any edits to documents directly to richard? Ops called to see if you were going to send edits
back thru secure fax. I assume you are not."
3261,Will do
3262,"Hillary: This is the most provocative and significant analysis to come out of the recent election. Its author is a right-wing
Republican lawyer based in Richmond who also writes a column for Human Events. I disagree with the ideological and
partisan undercurrent of the piece, especially his overemphasis of the deficit as an overriding political factor rather than
the administration's lack of achievable results so far in improving the living standards of ordinary people. There is no
reason why the deficit shouldn't become a merely abstract factor once there are actual benefits delivered. The pattern of
the past is that the deficit, the talisman of Hoover Republicans, moves only partisan Republicans and that Democrats
ascend if the economy is progressing, its gains are widely spread and new social programs have favorable universal
impact. That is not happening now. This analysis, therefore, may be portentous. Worth reading. The electoral maps of VA
don't show up in the email but they are described. Sid
Return to the Article
November 13, 2009
Can the Clinton Coalition Survive Obama?
By Sean Trende
John Judis and Ruy Teixeira's well-regarded 2002 work The Emerging Democratic Majority begins with a vignette set in
Virginia. They tell the story of a telecom executive named Mark Warner, who runs a moderate campaign that appeals to
upper-middle class suburbanites and working class rural voters, and manages to put together a winning coalition that, if
imitated in other states, might put the Democrats in power for decades to come.
Democrats did build coalitions similar to Warner's, and in fact had been doing so for the better part of a decade. Warner's
coalition was essentially Bill Clinton's 1996 coalition. The coalition and brand that Clinton built was an extraordinarily
successful one for Democrats, breaking the momentum of a resurgent GOP in 1996, and ultimately enabling the election
of the most liberal President in American History last year.
Given this background, it's only appropriate that the first tangible sign that this coalition is coming unglued has come in
Virginia. Republican Bob McDonnell won the governorship with almost 59% of the vote — the highest percentage (though
not the highest victory margin) for any governor since 1961. The entire Republican ticket won by similar margins, and the
GOP picked up six seats in the General Assembly. It could have been even worse — five Democrats won their Assembly
races by fewer than 1,000 votes.
There are some superficial lessons to be drawn here. After last week's election, it's silly to argue that the GOP brand is
too damaged for them to take advantage of Democratic weakness. And the Democrats' latest spin — that their weakness
among Independents was simply a function of more Republicans calling themselves independents but retaining their
Republican voting habits — puts the lie to the argument that Republicans' low self-identification is a salient factor in
elections.
But the most important lesson is this: while there's little predictive value in off-year elections, they do provide snapshots of
the mood of the electorate, and the present state of political coalitions. Given Virginia's primacy in the story of Democratic
coalition building, it gives us a good snapshot of the state of that coalition. And it's not a pretty one for Democrats.
The historical base of the Democratic Party for two centuries has long been what Jay Cost and I call Jacksonians:
Culturally conservative, hawkish, and populist whites located throughout the South and Border states. They began
breaking away from Democrats in the 1950s and 1960s — their reaction to the Party's embrace of unions, blacks and
liberals is a story is so well known there's no need to rehash it here.
But this group remained at least in play for the Democrats. Clinton inherited a coalition consisting of minorities, liberals,
urban voters, and a decent remnant of Jacksonian voters in the Ohio River Valley and the South, who still preferred a
moderate-to-conservative Democrat to a Republican. This coalition became a majority coalition when Clinton used a
combination of fiscal conservatism and social moderation to bring suburban voters on board. This was a huge innovation
for Democrats; suburbs like Nassau County, NY, Orange County, CA and Fairfax County, VA had fueled the rise of the
Republican parties in those states. Clinton moved them substantially toward his side. This coalition allowed him to win by
eight points in 1996; absent Perot and a last-minute fundraising scandal, he probably would have won by more.
Clinton intuited that suburban voters are, generally speaking, culturally cosmopolitan — they don't like it when you call
someone ""macaca,"" and aren't crazy about the religious right. But they're generally not particularly socially liberal either,
and are fans of ""law and order."" They like taxes low and appreciate economic growth, but like good schools and a clean
environment. Having to balance a bunch of spending priorities with somewhat limited income in their daily lives, balanced
budgets are the ultimate ""good government"" indicator for these voters.
Clinton delivered on all of these issues, keeping tax increases fairly small, and balancing the budget for much of his term.
In so doing — and this is very important — he re-branded the Democrats as the party of fiscal responsibility, economic
growth, moderate taxes, and smart government. In other words, he finally shed the ""Carter"" label for the Democrats. This,
in turn, made it plausible for his much more liberal heirs to benefit from this presumption of competence for Democrats -
one that they probably would not have enjoyed without him.
George W. Bush's presidency, in turn, was an upper-middle class suburbanite's nightmare. An aggressive social agenda,
a fiscal trainwreck, two poorly-managed wars and a financial collapse later, these suburban voters trended even more
heavily Democratic then they were in the Clinton era. By 2008, Democrats held most of the suburban districts around ,
major metropolitan areas, and were threatening in the exurbs. The right Democratic candidate probably could have put
together a massive 2008 Presidential majority, combining minorities, liberals, Jacksonians, Catholics, and suburbanites.
The mood of the country was certainly right for a 1920/1932/1952/1980 result.
But the Democrats nominated Barack Obama. The party's grip among Jacksonians had weakened since Clinton left the
stage, but they abandoned Obama completely. Jay Cost and I have detailed this here. This movement is why Obama
received 53% of the vote, instead of the 60% or so we might expect given the voters' attitude toward Bush's Presidency.
Obama was able to win even without this branch of the Democratic party because he generated such intensity among the
remaining portions of his base. In other words, while his base wasn't as broad as Clinton's, it was deeper. Faced with
vanishing 401ks and home values, and disgust with Bush's presidency, suburbanites flocked to him. Liberals were
enthralled to finally elect one of their own. And minorities turned out heavily for the opportunity to elect the first black
President.
But this presents a problem. You only get to elect the first black President once, and governing a coalition of suburbanites,
poor blacks, and upper class liberals isn't easy. It is hard to keep that enthusiasm up. And with the Jacksonian wing of the
party gone, if that enthusiasm dissipates, or if one of the coalition groups becomes disgruntled and starts to shuffle out the
door, the party isn't left with much.
We see a microcosm of this story in last Tuesday's elections, especially in Virginia. Let's backtrack to 2001, and look at
the counties that Mark Warner won.
The coalition that Warner built was similar to Clinton's. To oversimplify some, it blended together rural Democrats in the
mining counties in the west of the state, college voters around Charlottesville, and black voters combined with rural whites
in the south central and southeastern portion of the state with suburban voters in the northeast. It was a diverse coalition,
but it worked.
Now let's compare Warner's map with Obama's map in 2008:
The suburbs stayed in the Democrat's camp, for reasons discussed above. But look what happens in the west! That area
becomes solidly Republican. Buchanan and Dickenson counties in the Virginia panhandle voted for Dukakis, Mondale,
and Adlai Stevenson (twice). Obama became only the second Democrat to lose these counties since the UMW moved in
during the 1920s.
As I said, this isn't a problem so long as (1) the Jacksonians show a willingness to come back for a candidate other than
Obama and/or (2) the suburbs continue their love affair with the Democrats. But we see indications in Virginia that the
Jacksonian divorce may, in fact, be permanent. Creigh Deeds was from the western section of the state, and seemed — at
least on paper — capable of remaking the Mark Warner map. It didn't happen, obviously. Let's look at how Virginia
changed from Bush's 2000 election to Deeds' loss last week:
The redder a county is, the more it moved toward the Republicans from 2000 to 2009; bluer counties moved toward
Democrats.
We see that McDonnell did as well as Bush did in the suburbs — but no better. Those pockets of white are the DC
suburbs in the northeast, the Hampton Roads area in the southeast, and Richmond just to the north and west of Hampton
Roads. Its rural Virginia — which is still about 1/3 of the electorate — that made the difference between Bush's 54% in
2004 and McDonnell's 59% on Tuesday. Even with Obama off the ticket, and a much less cosmopolitan figure atop the
ticket, rural Virginia went solidly Republican.
We can take another angle here. Deeds and McDonnell squared off in a very close Attorney General race in 2005. Let's
compare Deeds' 2005 showing to his 2009 performance. [NOTE: In this map, we look at ""relative movement."" Because
everything in the state moved toward McDonnell, a map just showing ""movement"" would be solid dark red, and not of
much use. So instead, if something moved more than 9 points toward McDonnell, it is colored a shade of red, if it moved
less than 9 points toward McDonnell, it is blue. Think of this as showing the change in the counties' PVI].
We see the same result. Just since 2005, rural Virginia has moved sharply against the Democrats. The suburbs haven't
moved much at all, relative to the rest of the state, while the more heavily African American counties in the southern
portion of the state have moved a few notches leftward (in absolute terms, they voted in 2009 as they had in 2005). This
suggests lasting damage to the Democratic brand here that is not simply personal to Obama.
Now let's look at how McDonnell did when compared to McCain in 2008. Again, because the movement here was so
dramatic statewide, we need to isolate the biggest and smallest changes by looking only at ""relative"" shifts.
The western counties of the state didn't shift much from 2008, but that's because they were already giving Republicans
around 70% of the vote — there wasn't much room for Republican growth (and remember, ""blue"" in a relative map still
means slight movement toward the Republican since 2008)! The real Republican gains over the past year have come in
the DC exurbs, in the 1-95 corridor, and to a lesser extent in the Hampton Roads area.
In other words, the Jacksonians aren't returning to the Democrats, at least in Virginia. Deeds might still have been able to
win without them, but the Democrats are also showing weakness in the Virginia suburbs. In other words, two pieces of the
Clinton-Warner coalition are starting to break away.
This is a real problem for the Democrats. If the suburbanites and the Jacksonians move away from the party, there is
very, very little left for them. And there's reason to think that the suburban weakness is real. Obama's fiscal policy, to
make an understatement, hasn't been Clintonian. It may not be entirely his fault, but the $787 billion stimulus, the trillion
dollar healthcare bill, the automobile bailout, and the budget showing trillion dollar deficits extending for the next decade
make suburbanites shudder. They don't much like debt, and they intuit this spending is going to have to be paid for at
some point — probably by them. Voters still give Obama some benefit of the doubt, as they do most Presidents in their first
year, but they are becoming very, very worried, and probably don't put much stock in Candidate Obama's promise to
enact a net spending cut any more.
Democrats will doubtless chalk this up to Creigh Deeds' inept campaign. Deeds wasn't a great candidate, but when the
mood of the country is starting to swing against your party, it is hard to run a good campaign. Jerry Kilgore found this out
when he ran in a similar environment in 2005, and was reduced to attacking Tim Kaine for his religious views on the death
penalty. And if you run the Deeds-McDonnell race in 2006 or 2008, I think its hard to argue McDonnell would win by 18
points, even holding everything else equal.
The other problem with this explanation is that we saw similar results replicated around the country. Most of the seats in
the House of Delegates that the Democrats lost in Virginia, or came close to losing, were suburban. The Philly suburbs
voted Republican for the state Supreme Court. Bergen County New Jersey didn't give the Republican 60% of the vote like
it did in 1984, but Chris Christie nearly carried it, and even though he is significantly more conservative than Christie Todd
Whitman or Tom Kean, he won the largest margin for a first-term Republican Governor since 1969. Conservative
Republicans won elections in Westchester County, New York, and Republicans picked up two City Council seats on the
outskirts of Queens. Republicans won back the Nassau County legislature -- the Democrats' capture of that body figures
prominently in the introduction to Emerging Democratic Majority -- and nearly defeated the Democratic County Executive
there with an obscure, underfunded candidate. In other words, in places that have never heard of Creigh Deeds or seen
his attack ads on McDonell's thesis, the Democrats still lost suburban voters.
States with a Democratic base of liberals, urbanites, and minority voters -- like California and New York -- haven't moved
much against Democrats. Obama's polling numbers, as well as those of Democratic candidates for Governor and
Senator, in classic ""Emerging Democratic Majority"" states like Colorado and Nevada are not looking good at all. And of
course in Jacksonian states like Kentucky, he's below 40%.
This doesn't mean that Democrats are doomed in 2010. An improved economy, Republican missteps, and a host of other
factors could keep the band together for them. Maybe some of the more marginal voters that Obama brought to the polls
to enact hope and change will return in 2010 to keep hope alive. But the personal nature of Obama's victory is starting to
show its downside for downticket Democrats.
The Clinton coalition is looking creaky. If Obama doesn't improve and the coalition comes apart, Democrats could find
themselves weaker than they were even in the 1980s and 1990s.
Sean Trende can be reached at strende@realclearpolitics.com.
Page Printed from:
http://www.realclearpolitics.comiarticles/2009111/13/can_the_clinton_coalition_survivethe_age_of_obama_99046
.html at November 13, 2009 - 08:19:49 AM CST"
3264,Yes
3265,Ihave a copy.
3266,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, November 13, 2009 4:06 PM
H
FW:
RELEASE IN PART
B6
fyi"
3270,tomorrow.
3272,"http://www.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2009-11-22/think-before-you-travel/?cid=hp:mainpromo2
The White House might try to blame the State Department (such an easy and delicious target) for the missteps. But
State's role in the conceptual planning of the trip was not central, and the department's senior Asia hand, Kurt Campbell,
surely knew better. It's also hard to tar the National Security Council's own senior Asia expert, Jeff Bader, another pro like
Campbell. Perhaps even higher officials at the NSC dropped the ball. Perhaps Mr. Obama might take responsibility
himself, as President Kennedy did after the Bay of Pigs fiasco in 1961. Now, that would truly clear the air—and open the
door to some obvious and necessary changes in the administration's decision-making machinery. Every decision, large
and small, is shaped and made by the president himself and enforced by Denis McDonough, a deputy NSC adviser and
the administration's Lord High Executioner. Does Obama get enough pushback? Is he hearing a range of views? Can he
see that his powerful intellect might profit from bowing to the voices of experience? If Mr. Obama reflects on the Asia
journey and other mishaps, he might loosen the reins and bring in additional policy and diplomatic pros as inside
counselors or outside advisers.
Amateur Hour at the White House
by Leslie H. Gelb
November 22, 2009 I 10:50pm
The Asia trip was not worth Obama's time. Leslie H. Gelb on why the president should shake up his
foreign policy team—and make sure the deals are done before he leaves home.
President Obama's nine-day trip to Asia is worth a look back to fix two potent problems, past and future. First, the trip's
limited value per day of presidential effort suggests a disturbing amateurishness in managing America's power. On top of
the inexcusably clumsy review of Afghan policy and the fumbling of Mideast negotiations, the message for Mr. Obama
should be clear: He should stare hard at the skills of his foreign-policy team and, more so, at his own dominant role in
decision-making. Something is awry somewhere, and he's got to fix it.
Secondly, the Asia trip presented an important opportunity to carve out a new American leadership role in the world's
most dynamic economic region, and Mr. Obama missed it. He only scratched the surface in his calls for multilateralism
and mutual understanding. He needs to paint pictures of how Washington will help solve regional security and trade
problems. Otherwise, most Asian nations will continue their unwanted drift toward China and away from the United States.
A meditation on his journey should start by forgetting half of the last week's commentary. Unbelievably, some criticized
Obama for not getting China to ""throw its weight around."" What Asian leaders want that? None that I know of. Others
lamented that Obama couldn't make ""demands"" on China anymore. The presumption here is that China is now king, and
that Washington can no longer have its way with Beijing. The facts are that Washington never did boss Beijing around,
and that China is not now ruling the roost (more accurately, it's sitting on its own eggs). Others contended that Obama
continued his pattern of trashing America's friends and coddling its authoritarian enemies like China. It's hard to stomach
this nonsense from the same conservative crowd that forever praised George W. Bush for accommodating China and
alienating America's allies.
Some analysts played fair and acknowledged that administration officials tried to tell reporters not to expect ""deliverables""
on the trip, and to see the journey more as a recognition of Asia's new importance and America's desire for a new co-
operative spirit. That's a commendable thought, but hardly justification for almost two weeks of the president's time (when
you consider preparations)— especially when he's got a tanking economy, health-care reform woes, and decisions to
make on Afghanistan. Presidents take trips like this one only when they need breakthroughs and accomplishments on
certain issues that can't be agreed on without the pressure of an impending presidential visit. In fact, most presidents
wouldn't even commit to trips abroad without knowing that key deals would be finally agreed on and announced during the
visit itself. The prospective visit is the power jackhammer to nail down the deals. Just take a gander at trips planned for
Richard Nixon by Henry Kissinger or for George H. W. Bush by James Baker.
Obama's travels were a chance to settle or make concrete progress on thorny issues like greenhouse-gas emissions, and
the fate of U.S. bases on Okinawa, which the new Japanese government insists on moving. It was time to announce ways
to gain fixes on the U.S.-South Korean trade treaty, long stalled in Congress. It was a moment to show that Beijing would
actually make some mutually beneficial compromises on exchange rates or economic sanctions against Iranian and North
Korean nuclear programs. Absent guarantees of progress on issues such as these, Mr. Obama should have taken a well-
deserved vacation in Hawaii.
Matters were made worse on the scene. It was not good optics for Obama to bow to Japan's emperor. He seems to do
this stuff spontaneously and inexplicably, as with his bow to the Saudi King some months ago. And it was truly unfortunate
that Obama and his aides didn't flatly insist that he be allowed to address the Chinese people directly on television and
meet with non-stacked Chinese groups—as has been the case during previous presidential visits. Beijing's leaders
obviously didn't feel confident enough of their own standing at home to give the popular Mr. Obama such access. But he
and his team should have made it a precondition of the visit. Its absence left an unhappy taste.
The Asia trip presented an important opportunity to carve out a new American leadership role in the world's most dynamic
economic region, and Mr. Obama missed it.
The White House might try to blame the State Department (such an easy and delicious target) for the missteps. But
State's role in the conceptual planning of the trip was not central, and the department's senior Asia hand, Kurt Campbell,
surely knew better. It's also hard to tar the National Security Council's own senior Asia expert, Jeff Bader, another pro like
Campbell. Perhaps even higher officials at the NSC dropped the ball. Perhaps Mr. Obama might take responsibility
himself, as President Kennedy did after the Bay of Pigs fiasco in 1961. Now, that would truly clear the air—and open the
door to some obvious and necessary changes in the administration's decision-making machinery. Every decision, large
and small, is shaped and made by the president himself and enforced by Denis McDonough, a deputy NSC adviser and
the administration's Lord High Executioner. Does Obama get enough pushback? Is he hearing a range of views? Can he
see that his powerful intellect might profit from bowing to the voices of experience? If Mr. Obama reflects on the Asia
journey and other mishaps, he might loosen the reins and bring in additional policy and diplomatic pros as inside
counselors or outside advisers.
If most Asia hands inside and outside the government had designed the Obama trip, here's what they would have
advised: Go beyond the usual and trite message of building mutual understanding and cooperation, and stop invoking the
God of Multilateralism without spelling out America's leadership role. Asia is now overflowing with multilateral
organizations. Washington is a member of a few key ones, like Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and the Asian
Development Bank. But that has little to do with other new and key groupings such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (Russia, China, Uzbekistan, etc.) and ASEAN, the association of Southeast Asian nations. Asian nations are
increasingly organizing themselves into these groups, and Washington hasn't really figured out its role. Most Asian
nations want that role to be a prominent one—in fact, the leadership position. They're afraid of China, afraid that China
won't be as attentive to their concerns in the future as America was in the past. At the same time, they don't want
Washington to come into these groupings and cause problems with Beijing. They want Washington to figure out a
leadership position constructed on the proven American ability to help solve common problems in the common interest.
They want an America they remember, one that can get things done and doesn't let problems fester.
That U.S. policy was the main missing ingredient on Obama's trip. Washington played architect and solidified its
leadership in Europe after World War II with NATO, the Marshall Plan, and various trade and economic organizations like
the World Bank. Asian nations are yearning for the same kind of creativity today from a brilliant American president in the
new Pacific Era.
Leslie H. Gelb, a former New York Times columnist and senior government official, is author of Power Rules: How
Common Sense Can Rescue American Foreign Policy (HarperCollins 2009), a book that shows how to think about and
use power in the 21st century. He is president emeritus of the Council on Foreign Relations.
For more of The Daily Beast, become a fan on Facebook and follow us on Twitter.
For inquiries, please contact The Daily Beast at editorialathedailvbeast.com.
http://www.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2009-11-22/think-before-you-travel/p/"
3273,Let me know when you are up
3274,"roy spence asked if u would say hello and take a picture with his friends. Its not john wren but someone else who works
at omni corn and his wife. Can we do later today in lobby on way out to airport?
Also, cathy hall is in town too. Also asking if she can say hello and thought we could do the same. What do u think?"
3275,"Tauscher, Ellen 0 <TauscherE0@state.gov>
Sunday, November 15, 2009 12:17 PM
H B6
Hillary! Thank you so much. How fabulous you were on Meet the Press. I'm so proud of you. I'm in Prague on my way to
Ankara Tuesday. Started off in New Delhi on Thursday and yes, Jim will be with us at your house for dinner Friday night.
Please stay safe on your travels and I'm so thrilled to work for you.
Best,
Ellen"
3277,They are calling you now.
3278,"I forgot to verbally tell you this today, but kiobuchar also has a call into you and she is on your grid."
3279,"H: The NYU Center on Law and Security, (where I remain associated as a senior fellow), has doen the work on terrorism
trials, especially in NY. The Center is closely involved with the NYPD terrorism unit; Mike Sheehan, whom you remember
as director of counterterrorism at State in the Clinton administration and at NYPD terrorism unit, is at the Center as a
fellow. Key statistic to cite:
What Kind of Results Can We Expect?
The New York City conviction rate for individuals charged with terrorism when it involved a US target
is 100%.
Sid"
3280,"I am traveling and have limited access to email. Please contact my office Chief of Staff, Simon Limage at
LimageSG@state.gov."
3281,"You should leave soon. They confirmed they are starting on time at 8pm.
Yang confirmed for 10:30. Ops will connect to the house."
3282,"Was just scanning now. All I'm finding are wire headlines on the coffee.
Looking to see if your KSM answer - specifically, ""I'm not going to second guess - is taken as less than full throated"
3283,"Not sure where you went but wjc tried to reach you.
He's now in with netanyahu.
Will call back when he's done."
3284,"There is a famous American movie called Field of Dreams, and in it, the hero - Kevin Costner - builds a baseball field at
his remote farm, he carves it out of his crop. Some people don't think what he's doing makes sense, they think it's a risk
- but he is a true baseball fanatic and he loves the game and he takes on the project because he keeps hearing...
""If you build it., they will come...
If you build it, they will come.""
Well ladies and gentlemen, I am proud to say that we built it, and we care coming to the Shanghai World Expo"
3285,"H: If Roubini is right, and he's been mostly right so far, one of the few, then without additional and large stimulus
devoted to putting a floor on job loss, the pressure on protectionism will be far more intense. (Protectionism, by
any name, should not be dismissed as a targeted tool in an ongoing policy to force China to revalue its currency.
The US is not without means here.) The deficit will be high in any case and the Republicans will always attempt to
exploit it no matter what its number. Whether another stimulus can pass Congress is another matter. Still, what
matters in the short-run--and long-run--are achievable results. To most people, the deficit is an abstraction;
employment and housing--and insecurity about both--are their vital, concrete and immediate issues. Sid
http://www.nydailynews.com/opinions/2009/11/15/2009-11-
15_the_worst_is_yet_to_come_unemployed_americans_should_hunker_down_for_more job_lo.html
The worst is yet to come: Unemployed
Americans should hunker down for more job
losses
BY Nouriel Roubini
Sunday, November 15th 2009, 4:00 AM
Think the worst is over? Wrong. Conditions in the U.S. labor markets are awful and worsening. While the official
unemployment rate is already 10.2% and another 200,000 jobs were lost in October, when you include discouraged
workers and partially employed workers the figure is a whopping 17.5%.
While losing 200,000 jobs per month is better than the 700,000 jobs lost in January, current job losses still average more
than the per month rate of 150,000 during the last recession.
Also, remember: The last recession ended in November 2001, but job losses continued for more than a year and half until
June of 2003; ditto for the 1990-91 recession.
So we can expect that job losses will continue until the end of 2010 at the earliest. In other words, if you are unemployed
and looking for work and just waiting for the economy to turn the corner, you had better hunker down. All the economic
numbers suggest this will take a while. The jobs just are not coming back.
There's really just one hope for our leaders to turn things around: a bold prescription that increases the fiscal stimulus with
another round of labor-intensive, shovel-ready infrastructure projects, helps fiscally strapped state and local governments
and provides a temporary tax credit to the private sector to hire more workers. Helping the unemployed just by extending
unemployment benefits is necessary not sufficient; it leads to persistent unemployment rather than job creation.
The long-term picture for workers and families is even worse than current job loss numbers alone would suggest. Now as
a way of sharing the pain, many firms are telling their workers to cut hours, take furloughs and accept lower wages.
Specifically, that fall in hours worked is equivalent to another 3 million full time jobs lost on top of the 7.5 million jobs
formally lost.
This is very bad news but we must face facts. Many of the lost jobs are gone forever, including construction jobs, finance
jobs and manufacturing jobs. Recent studies suggest that a quarter of U.S. jobs are fully out-sourceable over time to other
countries.
Other measures tell the same ugly story: The average length of unemployment is at an all time high; the ratio of job
applicants to vacancies is 6 to 1; initial claims are down but continued claims are very high and now millions of
unemployed are resorting to the exceptional extended unemployment benefits programs and are staying in them longer.
Based on my best judgment, it is most likely that the unemployment rate will peak close to 11% and will remain at a very
high level for two years or more.
The weakness in labor markets and the sharp fall in labor income ensure a weak recovery of private consumption and an
anemic recovery of the economy, and increases the risk of a double dip recession.
As a result of these terribly weak labor markets, we can expect weak recovery of consumption and economic growth;
larger budget deficits; greater delinquencies in residential and commercial real estate and greater fall in home and
commercial real estate prices; greater losses for banks and financial institutions on residential and commercial real estate
mortgages, and in credit cards, auto loans and student loans and thus a greater rate of failures of banks; and greater
protectionist,pressures.
The damage will be extensive and severe unless bold policy action is undertaken now.
Roubini is professor of Economics at the Stern School of Business at New York University and Chairman of Roubini
Global Economics.
Read more: http://www.nydailynews.com/opinions/2009/11/15/2009-11-
15 the worst is yet to come unemployed americans should hunker down for more job lo.html?print=1&paqe=all#i
xzz0WwHGikNI"
3286,"I met with Steve.
We had a good cony and discussed a number of areas of focus, most of which are WI.
Take a look and flag any concerns.
I am going to discuss with Jack this am.
Cdm"
3287,calling
3288,"1.4(D)
B1
Heading home after visit to Bangladesh where you are remembered with great affection and where they are eager to
have you make a return visit.
It was a reunion for me in many ways -- the experiences from '95 still vivid, and it was a positive message that I came 1.4(B)
back! 1.4(D)
B1
Our amb there is terrific. (Moriarty). He's going to keep close tabs on the situation. The sum of all this seems to be
political. It's so sad.
I'll give you a fuller readout on this and the trip more generally.
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 11/16/2024"
3289,FYI — Bill Burns cannot move his meeting.
3290,"Hope you are well this morning. I will be in the hold room if you need any assistance. We had a fun dinner with Phillippe
and Jake last night. Wish you were with us! Best Kurt"
3292,"sbwhoeop
Tuesday, November 17, 2009 8:57 AM
H
FYI: Lead FT editorial today, must if you haven't read. Sid
Financial Times FT.com
OMMENT
editorial
US fumbling for a new China tone
Published: November 16 2009 20:39 I Last updated: November 16 2009 20:39
Gone are the days when the US president could visit Beijing as the unassailable top dog, able to lecture the Chinese on
everything from human rights to an overvalued currency. As has become fashionable to note, events have instead obliged
Barack Obama to play the role of washed-up debtor visiting his stern bank manager for yet another loan.
That analogy is useful. But it can be overdone. Certainly, the financial crisis has brought into sharp relief just how
dependent the US has become on foreign creditors, chief among them China.
It has also sharpened the perception of what had been happening anyway, the relative decline of a US-centric west and
the relative rise of a China-centric Asia. But the word relative is important. China, poor and riddled with internal
contradictions, is not there yet, by a very long way.
The changing relationship with China does demand a new tone. But early indications are that Mr Obama is still fumbling
for the right one. Take global imbalances.
In the only set-piece speech of his Asian tour — delivered in Japan, perhaps to assure his hosts that Washington is not
abandoning Tokyo just yet — Mr Obama correctly pointed out that the global economy cannot go back to business as
usual. ""One of the important lessons this recession has taught us is the limits of depending primarily on American
consumers and Asian exports to drive growth,"" he said.
That is quite right. But his entreaties on global rebalancing fall flat in China. That is partly because Beijing remains publicly
sceptical about the US's long-term finances.
From China's perspective, Mr Obama's emergency measures to stimulate the US economy and persuade Americans to
spend their way out of recession smack of re-creating the spendthrift ways that triggered the crisis in the first place.
That explains why Chinese officials have quizzed their US counterparts so robustly about how they intend to pay for
healthcare reform. It is also why Beijing has started questioning US monetary, as well as fiscal, policy.
On the eve of the US president's visit, Liu Mingkang, China's chief banking regulator, took a swipe at the US Federal
Reserve, saying the combination of a weak dollar and low interest rates risked generating a global asset bubble. That is a
bit rich coming from someone who oversees a banking system that has pumped the equivalent of nearly 30 per cent of
gross domestic product into the economy so far this year. But it reflects the new tone with which China presumes it can
address a humbled superpower.
Mr Obama's efforts to occupy the moral high ground are also undermined by his flirtation with protectionism, particularly
his decision to slap tariffs on Chinese tyres.
His administration has failed to spell out a convincing trade policy — and that is seen as a stark omission for-a business-
oriented Asian audience. Such perceived deficiencies have hobbled his ability to cajole China with any real conviction.
When it comes to human rights, too, the US seems to have drawn the conclusion it is not good policy to badmouth its
chief creditor.
Hillary Clinton, secretary of state, set the tone early when she said that human rights should not ""interfere"" with matters of
implicitly greater urgency. Mr Obama obligingly omitted all references to Tibet, Xinjiang and even Taiwan from his Tokyo
speech. There was also not a single mention of India, a potential regional counterweight to China, yet another indication
that Washington is behaving as though it is treading on eggshells. It was therefore all the more refreshing to hear Mr
Obama criticise Chinese censorship during his town hall meeting in Shanghai on Monday — though even that could not
undo his own self-censorship in refusing to meet the Dalai Lama before this week's trip.
It is right and proper that the US acknowledge the rising significance of China. Mr Obama's assurances that China's rise
need not be a threat were spot on. But by the same token, US accommodation can be taken too far. Contrary to common
perception, China's huge holdings of US treasuries are not a sign of great strength. They are evidence of how dependent
Chinese growth has been on the US consumer.
Equally, any idea that China, with an economy less than a third the size of the US and a GDP per capita roughly the same
as Angola's, can somehow save the world is ludicrous. Mr Obama is right to show respect to China. He need not — and
must not — kowtow.
Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2009. Print a single copy of this article for personal use. Contact us if you wish to
print more to distribute to others.
""FT"" and ""Financial Times"" are trademarks of the Financial Times. Privacy policy I Terms
© Copyright The Financial Times Ltd 2009."
3293,"Council on Foreign Relations
Expert Brief
The U.S.-China Economic Relationship: Separating Facts from Myths
Steven Dunaway, Adjunct Senior Fellow for International Economics
Author:
Former deputy director of the Asia and Pacific department at the International Monetary Fund. Author
of the Council Special Report, Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis.
November 16, 2009
http://www.cfr.org/publication/20757/uschina_economic_relationship.html?breadcrumb=°/02Fregion%2F271%2Fchina
Many myths surround the economic relationship between the United States and China. Four, in particular, stand out, and
it is important to identify them as myths to avoid misunderstandings that could adversely influence policy decisions. The
fact that China has become the largest foreign holder of U.S. government securities is taken as indicating that the United
States is heavily dependent on China to finance its budget deficits. Similarly, since China is a major source for U.S.
imports, U.S. consumers are seen as dependent on cheap Chinese goods. In addition, the Chinese authorities have
emphasized that they strongly resist external pressures to try to influence policy decisions and that economic instability in
China is bad, with adverse implications for the rest of the world.
Taken together, these four myths could lead to the conclusion that China should not be pushed hard by the United States
(or other major countries) to more quickly change its policies, especially its exchange rate policy, to facilitate the
rebalancing of its economy. But such a conclusion would be a major mistake, and that is why during his trip to Asia,
President Barack Obama needs to dispel these myths and bring pressure to bear for faster economic policy changes in
China. This would be in keeping with the objectives for dealing with global imbalances laid out by the G-20 summit in
Pittsburgh in September 2009.
Myth No. 1: Washington has limited leverage because China is the main ""banker"" for the United States
China holds a large amount of U.S. government securities. Of China's $2.3 trillion in official reserves, it is estimated that
70 percent is held in U.S. dollar assets. China is a big customer for U.S. debt, but it is not America's banker. Nor is the
United States dependent on China to finance its budget deficits. If China elects not to buy U.S. Treasuries, there are other
willing public and private sector buyers, as indicated by the strong demand for these securities worldwide. Although the
U.S. government might have to pay higher interest rates as an incentive to get other investors to buy Treasuries in the
event that the Chinese reduce their demand, the increase in interest rates would likely be small.
Major consequences from a decision by China to reduce its purchases of U.S. Treasury securities would depend on the
reason behind the decision. It would be in China's best interest (and beneficial for the rest of the world as well) if China
reduced its purchases of U.S. Treasuries because it decided to stop heavily managing its exchange rate and allow greater
flexibility in the currency's movements. This is an important policy change that is required if China is going to rebalance its
economy and be able to sustain rapid growth.
China is a big customer for U.S. debt, but it is not America's banker. Nor is the United States dependent on China to
finance its budget deficits.
If instead China continues to heavily manage its exchange rate, it will build up large additional amounts of official
reserves. If it decides to hold less of these additional reserves in U.S. Treasury securities, then China will increase its
purchases of assets denominated in other currencies, with euro-denominated securities being the most likely alternative.
In these circumstances, China would continue to intervene in its exchange market, with the central bank buying U.S.
dollars for Chinese renminbi and then selling dollars for euro to acquire European assets. The result would be an
appreciation of the euro. Consequently, countries in Europe, not the United States, would probably be most affected by
China's move because the negative impact of euro appreciation on European economic activity would likely far outweigh
the effects on the United States of smaller Chinese purchases of Treasuries.
Alternatively, China could choose to start dumping its stock of U.S. securities. The result would be appreciation of other
major currencies (depending on where China would decide to park its reserve assets); upward pressure on U.S. interest
rates; and the possibility of financial market disruptions if China dumped its U.S. dollar assets rapidly. However, the U.S.
Federal Reserve could limit the rise in U.S. interest rates and would be able to ensure adequate liquidity to prevent market
disruptions. But a decision to dump Treasuries would have a large effect on China itself. The country would incur a
substantial capital loss on its reserve assets. The Chinese authorities are deeply concerned about such a loss, and are
very unlikely to decide to dump U.S. assets. In fact, the discussion initiated by China regarding the need for an alternative
official reserve asset is motivated by its concerns about potential losses on its U.S. dollar holdings.
Myth No. 2: The United States is heavily dependent on cheap Chinese goods
This is not really true. Only roughly 15 percent of U.S. imports come from China. Moreover, all of the basic types of
manufactured consumer goods that China exports to the United States (clothing, textiles, footwear, toys, small appliances,
etc.) can be imported from other countries or could be produced domestically. The prices for goods that could substitute
for products from China would be higher, but the difference in costs would be relatively small. Competition among
producers has become fiercer, and as a result cost differentials between goods from China and other suppliers are
narrowing.
Dependence actually runs the other way. China is highly dependent on U.S. demand for its products. Economic growth in
China is heavily dependent on exports. Although China has been able to achieve its 8 percent GDP growth target in 2009
owing to the stimulus to domestic demand provided by government policy actions, the country will struggle to meet this
objective in 2010 and succeeding years if demand for its exports in the United States does not pick up.
Myth No. 3: External pressure on China for policy changes is counterproductive.
The Chinese authorities stress that in the face of external pressure, they tend to strongly resist economic policy changes.
The Chinese have in particular used this argument to try to fend off pressures for appreciation of the exchange rate. While
no country wants to appear to be weak and susceptible to external pressure, the truth is that, if there is no pressure, there
is less incentive to change policy. This is especially true in China, where the authorities are wedded to the status quo
because of past success and inclined to make only gradual changes to economic policies. Recent developments in
China's exchange rate illustrate this point. In the absence of external pressure since August 2008, China has reverted to
fixing its exchange rate relative to the U.S. dollar.
Without a hard push from the United States on a bilateral and multilateral basis, changes in China's policies are likely to
be delayed, and that is not in the best interest of the United States and the rest of the world.
Myth No. 4: Instability is bad for China
Chinese authorities also have suggested that instability in China is bad for the rest of the world because of adverse effects
on China's growth rate. But instability (or the fear of instability) has played a big role in initiating economic policy changes
in China. For example, concern about instability arising from the growing gap between urban and rural incomes has been
a major factor behind new initiatives to develop China's interior (such as the Develop the West program) and to improve
conditions and opportunities for the rural population (including breaking down restrictions and discriminatory treatment of
migrant workers). Hence, for China, instability is not necessarily bad, but it is a problem for the authorities. Instability in
China also is not necessarily bad for the rest of the world because of its effect on China's growth. Although China
accounts for a significant portion of world GDP growth, the country does not generate much demand for products from
other countries given China's large trade and current account surpluses. Some countries in Asia and commodity
producers may be benefiting from China's strong growth, but overall, it is not providing much stimulus for the world
economy as a whole, so slower growth in China will have little effect on economic activity in the rest of the world.
It is important for President Obama to separate fact from myth in his economic policy discussions with the Chinese
authorities during this trip to Asia to build a sounder relationship. The president should not shy away from pushing the
Chinese hard on economic reform and rebalancing of China's economy, but this should be done in his private discussions
with China's senior leaders. Multilateral discussions, such as those in the context of the G-20 process, are a much more
effective forum for the United States to take a public stance on China's economic policies jointly with other major
economies.
Without a hard push from the United States on a bilateral and multilateral basis, changes in China's policies are likely to
be delayed, and that is not in the best interest of the United States and the rest of the world. It also is not in the best
interest of China, because without a shift away from heavy dependence on investment and exports to drive growth toward
greater reliance on consumption, China will not be able to sustain rapid economic growth and development. Getting China
to fully realize this and to act more quickly than the authorities are inclined to do is a considerable task for the United
States and other major economies."
3294,Corning
3295,"Jake, capricia, philippe and I going to
Left u note upstairs.
Cdm wants u to call.
Leaving eikenberry memo for u."
3296,FYI
3297,"I will be traveling next week so I will not be in the office.
If there are time-sensitive matters that I can address this week rather than next week, please let me know.
Best.
cdm"
3298,"Yes, will call now."
3299,"B1
1.4(D)
See below."
3300,"Thanks, Hillary. I don't know about details of Obama's plan, but you looked terrific at the speech.
(Lincoln, in 1864, on Obama's plan: ""The difficulty is not in stating the principle, it is in applying it."")
Too bad Rep. Wilson didn't wear a red pantsuit.
Max continues to rocket--up to #8 overall this am, #1 in every nonfiction category except cookbooks.
And last night in an special election Jackie was elected Advisory Neighborhood Commissioner in DC.
It was a hard fought race, in fact, and her opponent ran a negative campaign against her on email
with the slogan: ""She's Not Jackie.""
Here's the draft of the article Max has written on the bad Joe Wilson (membership in racist
organization) and that will be published today. This should do it.
Let's speak when you have time.
Rep. Joe Wilson's Rebel Yell
Inside the racist klavern that Joe Wilson joined
By Max Blumenthal
Since Republican Rep. Joe Wilson of South Carolina bellowed at President Barack
Obama, ""You lie!"" during the president's nationally televised speech on healthcare,
the fourth term backbencher has emerged as a hero among the conservative
grassroots. One of the most enthusiastic endorsements of Wilson's histrionics came
from the Sons of Confederate Veterans (SCV), a group that Wilson has <a
href=http://crooksandliars.com/david-neiwert/obama-heckler-joe-wilson-member-
neo>belonged to</a> for several years.
""Mr. Wilson, never apologize for allowing your love of truth to overrun your desire
to be polite,"" the SCV Tea Party <a
href=http://scvteaparty.com/?p=165>declared</a> on its website. ""It is the liar who
must apologize, not the one who identifies the liar!""
Who are the SCV? A once-proud organization of Confederate history buffs and re-
enactors who spent their organization's money to restore Civil War-era battlefields
and Confederate cemeteries, by 2006 the SCV was substantially <a
href=http ://www. sp lcenter. org/inte l/intelreport/artic le .j sp?pid=1027 >taken
over</a> by an organized cadre of white supremacist radicals (read <a
href=http://www.splcenter.org/intel/intelreport/article.jsp?pid=154 >here</a> for
more background) who sought to turn the nation's oldest Southern historical society
into what the veteran white supremacist activist Kirk Lyons called ""a modern, 21st
century Christian war machine capable of uniting the Confederate community and
leading it to ultimate victory."" When the racist junta had seized much of the SCV's
leadership positions, the Southern Poverty Law Center released an <a
href=http://www.splcenter.org/intel/intelreport/article.jsp?sid=90 >extensive
list</a> of SCV officials who belonged to ""hate groups.""
Lyons, a key leader of the white supremacists who took over the SCV, had <a
href=hftp://www.thenation.com/doc/20050829/blumenthal/single >harbored
dreams</a> of creating a seemingly benign front group for a more sophisticated
version of the Ku Klux Klan. ""I have great respect for the Klan historically, but,
sadly the Klan today is ineffective and sometimes even destructive,"" Lyons told a
German neo-Nazi magazine in 1992. ""It would be good if the Klan followed the
advice of former Klansman Robert Miles: 'Become invisible. Hang the robes and
hoods in the cupboard and become an underground org anization.'"" With the SCV,
Lyons discovered he didn't have to go underground after all.
Once Lyons helped install his close friend, Ron Wilson, as president of the SCV,
the organization's political newsletter, <a href=http://fpacscv.org/southernmercury/
>The Southern Mercury</a> (where Wilson served as senior editor), transformed
into a propaganda mill for crude white supremacist cant. Mailed to all dues-paying
members of the SCV — presumably including Rep. Joe Wilson — until it went
defunct in 2008, the Mercury has published articles describing blacks as genetically
inferior to whites, calling African-Americans as ""a childlike people,"" and warned
that if Obama runs for re-election, race riots of an ""exceedingly violent nature""
would immediately ensure, leaving ""entire sections of some of our cities in ruins.""
Here are a few highlights from the Southern Mercury:
""After the turn of the 20th century, the white Southerners had disfranchised and segregated
the blacks, in perhaps the mildest reaction possible at=2 Othat time to the blacks' transgressions.
The blacks — then a childlike people — had been selling their votes to the Democrats en masse for
$.25 apiece in national elections.""
--""Where We Stand Now, And How We Got Here,"" by Frank Conner, Southern Mercury,
September/October 2003
""Previously, anthropologists had routinely recorded the notable differences in IQ among
the races; but at Columbia, a liberal cultural anthropologist named Franz Boas...decreed that
there were no differences in IQ among the races, and the only biological differences between the
blacks and whites were of superficial nature... Meanwhile, the liberals in the media heaped
special praise upon black athletes, musicians, singers, and writers — and treated them as typical
of the black race. The liberals were creating a false image of the blacks in America as a highly
competent people who were being held back by the prejudiced white Southerners.""
--Conner, September/October 2003
""It is very clear to me that if Barack Obama should be elected President, he would be
extremely anti-white and would demand reparations for slavery and press hard for affirmative
action to the degree that it would hurt young whites who were seeking jobs or admission to
College and Graduate Schools.""
--""Americans Face The Worst Presidential Candidates In History,"" by Robert Slimp, Southern
Mercury, May/June 2008
""I believe that [Obama's] rhetoric and anti-white legislative proposals would stir up racial
riots. If he were running for re-election, these riots would turn into an exceedingly violent nature
that would seriously damage race relations in America, and leave entire sections of some of our
cities in ruins.""
--Slimp, May/June 2008
Rep. Joe Wilson could have resigned from the SCV as soon as the organization's
takeover by open white supremacists began. But he didn't. Or he could have
withdrawn his membership when the SCV's flagship journal turned into a racist rag.
But he didn't. Instead, while serving as a state senator, Wilson led an SCV-inspired
campaign in 2000 to keep the Confederate flag flying above South Carolina's state
capitol. ""The Southern heritage, the Confederate heritage, is very honorable,""
Wilson <a href=http ://news. bbc . co .uk/2/hi/americas/503579.stm>proclaimed</a> at
the time, responding to critics of the Confederate flag.
Wilson's rebel yell at Obama has electrified the Republican grassroots, filling his
campaign coffers with donations <a
href=http://wwvv.freep.com/article/20090910/BLOG36/90910072/Wilson-takes-
case-online--pleads-for-donations>he is soliciting</a> from conservatives across
the country and earning the undistinguished, previously unknown backbencher
primetime appearances on right-wing talk shows. Wilson has become the new voice
of the Republican opposition, reigniting the Lost Cause as a raucous crusade to
sabotage healthcare reform."
3301,Will also print
3302,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, December 1, 2009 7:13 PM
H
We left message for suozzi.
He's supposed to be home after 5:30. And reachable at"
3303,"8:00 am BREAKFAST w/SENATORS MCCAIN, LIEBERMAN AND COLLINS
9:00 am James Monroe Room, 8th Floor
9:00 am DROP-BY MEETING w/SE MITCHELL
9:15 am S Conference Room
9:30 am MEETING w/LT. GENERAL PAUL SELVA (JCS)
9:40 am Secretary's Office
9:55 am MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR TERRENCE LEE BARNICH,
10:30 am George C. Marshall Auditorium
10:50 am BRIEFING w/CHRISTOPHER HILL U.S. AMBASSADOR TO IRAQ
11:50 am Secretary's Conference Room
11:50 am DROP-BY w/CAMBODIAN PARLIMENTARIAN MU SOCHUA
11:55 am Secretary's Office *Official photo.
11:55 am DEPART State Department *En route White House
12:00 pm ARRIVE White House
12:00 pm ONE-ON-ONE MEETING w/RAHM EMMANUEL
12:45 pm COS Office, West Wing
1:00 pm SUNDAY MEETING PREP
2:45 pm White House Situation Room
2:50 pm DEPART White House *En route State Department
2:55 pm ARRIVE State Department
3:00 pm WOMEN'S FUND MEETING
3:30 pm Secretary's Office
3:40 pm DEPART State Department *En route Andrews AFB
4:05 pm ARRIVE Andrews AFB
4:15 pm DEPART Andrews AFB via Air Force Aircraft Tail ilTbd *En route New York, NY
5:05 pm ARRIVE LaGuardia Airport
5:10 pm DEPART LaGuardia Airport *En route Beacon Theater
5:55 pm ARRIVE Beacon Theater
6:00 pm KEYNOTE REMARKS AT THE SEPTEMBER 116 NATIONAL
6:45 pm DAY OF SERVICE COMMEMORATION Beacon Theater
6:50 pm DEPART Beacon Theater *En route Waldorf Astoria Hotel
7:10 pm ARRIVE Waldorf Astoria Hotel
7:15 pm THE ROOSEVELT INSTITUTE'S FOUR FREEDOMS AWARD
9:00 pm CEREMONY AND GALA DINNER Grand Ballroom, Waldorf Astoria Hotel
9:05 pm DEPART Waldorf Astoria Hotel *En route Private Residence
###"
3304,Will bring tomorrow
3305,fyi
3306,Remind me to discuss
3307,"Importance: High
Just following up on a few items.
First, see below on Nagorno-Karabakh.
Third, on QME, Gates and Barak are meeting the week of UNGA and we are holding until then if you are comfortable
with that.
Fourth, Declan Kelly is going to be in Belfast Monday and Tuesday with Lou Susman. I will be there Tuesday for all of the
official meetings. Declan and I will stay Tuesday night after Lou leaves and have dinner with a broad cross-section of
folks.
Fifth, I'm working with Holbrooke's and Lew's shops on the materials for Af/Pak, and we'll have a concept paper over
the weekend on the UNGA curtain raiser.
Sixth, Mike Fuchs and I met with Team WHA on Mexico, following up on Carlos' memo. Mike is working with WHA to
ensure that we create a productive agenda and outcomes for the Merida meeting you will participate in at UNGA.
(SBU) Reports about an alleged lethal incident along the line of contact in Nagorno-Karabakh remain
unconfirmed. The potential implications on the peace process are not yet clear. At the moment, regional
leaders are responding cautiously and the impact on other regional processes does not appear
significant. The Armenian Ministry of Defense denied any unusual activity along the line of contact; the
Azerbaijan Ministry of Defense told media that incidents are frequent along the line of contact. Embassy
Yerevan reports that it is customary to deny reports of sniper incidents along the line of contact, but that an
incident of this magnitude would be difficult to cover up. Embassy Baku notes that President Aliyev is in
Kazakhstan and local authorities could be waiting for his return before deciding on how to proceed. Neither of
our Embassies have been able to confirm local media reports.
John L. Espinoza
Deputy Director
Office of Caucasus Affairs and Regional Conflicts
Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs
Department of State
17€:
Tel: 202-647-6795
Fax: 202-736-7915"
3308,That will be hard unless you leave white house early.
3309,"Madam Secretary,
Thank you so much. It is very exciting to finally see the book in print (when I first got a copy I was almost afraid to look
inside it!). I hope you enjoy it. And yes, I have been working with Lissa and others on the democracy/human rights
speech.
On the question about UK soldiers - the UK lost more soldiers in the Falklands than they have in Afghanistan:
255 in the Falklands
235 in Afghanistan (including British forces personnel and MOD civilians)
Please let me know if you would like any other information on that.
Again, thank you so much, and Happy Thanksgiving!
Sincerely,
Mike"
3311,"for purposes of submission of testimony to committee/public release, how do you want to handle? may have to
send to hill before/concurrent with call.
On Wed, Dec 2, 2009 at 7:59 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Ok let's discuss in call."
3312,"Great, will add to the calendar and list for discussion."
3313,"Super, thanks. Gina
On Wed, Dec 2, 2009 at 6:38 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
I would love to see you on Dec 14th as you pass thru town. I'm asking Huma and Lona to schedule a time for
us to catch up. Hope all is well w you and yours, H"
3314,"Here is rasmussen statement at press conf today:
On behalf of NATO, I warmly welcome President Obama's announcement on the new US approach and commitment to
the mission in Afghanistan. President Obama's decision to substantially increase the numbers of US forces in the NATO-
led operation is proof of his resolve; the overall approach he laid out is a broader political strategy for success. The
United States' contribution to the NATO-led mission has always been substantial; it is now even more important.But this
is not a US mission alone: America's Allies in NATO have shared the risks, costs and burdens of this mission from the
beginning. As the US increases its commitment, I am confident that the other Allies, as well as our Partners in the
mission, will also make a substantial increase in their contribution. Taken together, the new force contributions from
across the Alliance, as well as the new approach agreed by all the ISAF countries, will help create a new momentum in
the mission in 2010."
3315,"10.
Thought you might want to know that our Kevbo is being honored at Chicago-Kent College of Law--
distinguished alum that he is. Anyway, just found out this morning and, of course, not from
Kevin. Betsy
On behalf of the Chicago-Kent
Alumni Board of Directors, we
invite you to join us at the 2009
Alumni Awards & Recognition
Luncheon. The event honors
this year's Alumni Award
recipients as well our alumni
and friends who volunteered
for the law school over the past
year.
Thursday, December 10,
2009
Reception: 11:30 a.m. —
Luncheon: 12:00 p.m.
The Standard Club
320 S. Plymouth Court,
Chicago, IL 60604
RSVP to alumskentlaw.edu
by Tuesday, December 8,
2009.
Chicago-Kent College of Lew Office of Alumni
Relations 565 W. Adams St., Suite
310 Chicago, IL 60661
Tel: (312) 906-5240 Fax (312) 906-5256 E-
mail: alumsakentlaw.edu Web:
www.alumni.kentlaw.edu
This email was sent to . To ensure that you
continue receiving our emails, please add us to
your address book or safe list.
manage your preferences I opt out using
TrueRemove®
Please note: Clicking ""opt out"" will remove you
from ALL email communication from Chicago-Kent.
If you would only like to opt out of receiving
invitations or the monthly Alumni E-Brief,
please click here to edit your email settings.
Got this as a forward? Sign up to receive our
future emails.
powered byg"
3316,"Jack lew is sending a note to you tonight about 2010 budget passback. he's hoping you will be able to review tonite. And
is available to discuss with you.
Will get to you as soon as its ready."
3317,FYI
3318,FYI more — I've spoken to Jim who is addressing but we can catch up about this when we speak.
3319,Assume this is something you want to do that we can lock on a date?
3320,Peres call confirmed for 8:30am.
3321,Richard hoibrooke asking to speak to you. Says he's available till 9am.
3322,"We tentatively told the plane 9nm wheels up. Do u want to leave earlier? Later?
1P4"
3323,Changing to 10. Not a problem.
3324,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, September 12, 2009 10:18 AM
H
Re: Tonite
Ill think of a place.
Mitchell can talk secure from plane. They will call your secure phone soon."
3326,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, September 12, 2009 10:02 AM
H
They just reached mitchell on plane. He will call back soon.
1.67"
3327,wife is
3328,"Cc:
RELEASE IN FULL
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, September 12, 2009 10:42 AM
Oscar Flores
H
Mitchell trying to reach hrc on secure phone on 3rd floor."
3329,Yes its actually mitchells phone on plane that's having the problem. They r reconnecting to his plane and trying u again.
3330,Mitchell calling one more time now.
3331,"Yes no problem to take the van
III meet you at la guardia"
3333,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, September 12, 2009 2:58 PM
H
Re: Question"
3335,"Fyi below - ellen and I have been speaking today and I am addressing personally so don't worry and will advise if you
need to step in.
Will call you around 430 or later - whatever works.
Cdm"
3336,"Yes, we can. Melanne would be happy to hear that!"
3337,"Arnold schwarzenegger called for you. Assume its about his climate change conference which we have regretted to his
stff.
Ops has his contact info
f.31"
3338,"Near you, there is a palena on connecticut which is rated one of the best restaurants in dc. Use fresh local produce for
everything.
There's also bourbon steak in the four seasons. They have some quiet booths and the food is really good."
3339,she likes.
3340,Calling in 5 min
3342,"Huma's right, she will be over the moon!"
3343,"FYI
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, November 25, 2009 11:08 AM
H
FW: FW: Uganda Death Penalty for Homosexual Activity Pending Law"
3344,John kerry trying to reach you.
3345,DRL did not have any more definitive sourcing on this. Does the below provide what you need?
3346,calling you now
3347,DRL did not have any more definitive sourcing on this. Does the below provide what you need?
3348,DRL did not have any more definitive sourcing on this. Does the below provide what you need?
3351,Will do.
3352,Will do.
3353,Will do.
3357,"Huma Abedin
Sunday, September 13, 2009 8:07 AM
'SullivanJJ@state.gov'
RELEASE IN PART
B6
III do so now."
3358,FYI
3359,Importance: Low
3360,FYI
3361,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 13, 2009 8:09 AM
H
Mitchell asking to talk to you after your white house meeting fyi."
3362,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 13, 2009 8:17 AM
H
Holbrooke says he needs to talk to you before wh mtg.
21:13"
3363,Non secure
3364,Feel free to call if I can help with anything before the meeting today. Ops can reach me at my DC apartment.
3365,"Juanes' wife gives birth to son in Miami
Not sure why jim mcgovern wants you to know this but fyi"
3366,"For hRC's review it's time sensitive and due today, so if you can print for her that would be ideal.
'anks.
ca.)."
3368,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Friday, December 4, 2009 3:31 AM
Iran
The EU meets in the coming days, and we are hoping for a strong public - and private - position on Iran. Bill has
identified 5 countries that need touching to help drive a good outcome:
I know Huma has discussed with you, but a 2-minute discussion with each that underscores the key points reflected on
your card would do the trick, if you can swing it.
Tx. Also, the intervention, with your modifications, turned out well. The process, in this case, did not generate a good •
enough product -- I tried to make it clearer and stronger this morning and your amendments helped a lot."
3369,"I actually went to respond on Friday and received an email saying the dinner had been cancelled!
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
(202) 647-9071"
3370,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, September 14, 2009 6:51 AM
H
FW: for S
Memo for S on activities.docx
I have comments on this so don't want to accept as final until giving them to her and you.
CUrn"
3373,"Secretary Clinton Host
Mr. Les Moonves CBS
Mrs. Christine Schwarzman Benefit Committee
Mr. Matthew Cowles Artists Committee Guest (Baranski)
Ms. Mimi O'Donnell Artists Committee Guest (Hoffman)
Mr. Frank Langella Artists Committee
Ms. Christine Baranski Artists Committee
Mr. Stephen Schwarzman KC Chairman
Ms. Barbara Walters Artists Committee Guest (Langella)
Mr. Philip Seymour Hoffman Artists Committee
Ms. Julie Chen CBS
Mr. Edward Albee Former Honoree"
3374,"sbwhoeop
Friday, December 4, 2009 3:57 PM
H: Suggestion... Sid
You might use this phrase: Milestones determine timelines.
Then in discussing milestones you can broaden the discussion beyond military targets to political and diplomatic
objectives."
3375,"Will do - taking off from miami now - will call you once we get there around 330pm
XO
Cdm"
3376,It starts at 2. I will call to give you a download as it unfolds.
3377,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, September 14, 2009 10:51 AM
H
FW: Hitting Bottom in Foggy Bottom
RELEASE IN FULL
FP
FortAgn Policy
Hitting Bottom in Foggy Bottom
The State Department suffers from low morale, bottlenecks, and bureaucratic ineptitude. Do we need to kill it to save it?
BY MATTHEW ARMSTRONG I SEPTEMBER 11, 2009
Discussion over the fate of Foggy Bottom usually focuses on the tenure of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, the troubles
of public diplomacy, and the rise of special envoys on everything from European pipelines to Afghanistan and Pakistan.
But Americans would benefit more from a reassessment of the core functionality of the U.S. State Department.
Years of neglect and marginalization, as well as a dearth of long-term vision and strategic planning, have left the 19th-
century institution hamstrung with fiefdoms and bureaucratic bottlenecks. The Pentagon now funds and controls a wide
range of foreign-policy and diplomatic priorities -- from development to public diplomacy and beyond. The world has
changed, with everyone from politicians to talking heads to terrorists directly influencing global audiences. The most
pressing issues are stateless: pandemics, recession, terrorism, poverty, proliferation, and conflict. But as report after
report, investigation after investigation, has highlighted, the State Department is broken and paralyzed, unable to
respond to the new 21st-century paradigm.
But how did it get so bad? Is it possible to fix? Or should we just push it over the wall like a great Humpty Dumpty and
reassign the pieces?
There is growing evidence that the internal machinations of the State Department have corrupted its ""core missions"" of
traditional diplomacy and public diplomacy. This year, for example, the Government Accountability Office (gao) found
that the department completely failed in its now four-year-old attempt to reorganize its nonproliferation bureau (a
bureau that remains leaderless). Besides failing to address mission overlap, low morale, and lack of career opportunities,
the failed reorganization caused a significant drop in expertise in offices focused on proliferation issues -- including
""today's threats posted by Iran, North Korea, and Syria,"" the gao's report said -- and coordination with bodies like the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Another report by the State Department's inspector general this year described severe and broad dysfunction within the
Africa bureau, while ignoring -- perhaps considering it a given -- the lack of departmentwide integration and leadership
in operations. Examples of the dysfunction range from not providing public diplomacy personnel with computers
capable of reading interoffice memos to a failure to effectively work with the new Africa Command.
By necessity, the Defense Department has stepped in where State Department has tuned out: Foggy Bottom relies on
Pentagon funding and even personnel for basic operations central to its mission. For example, the Defense Department
now performs much strategic communications work traditionally the purview of the State Department. In Somalia, for
example, the State Department's budget for public diplomacy is $30,000. The Pentagon's is $600,000. And, in the State
Department's bureaucratic wisdom, the $30,000 does not even belong to its undersecretary for public diplomacy and
public affairs.
Further, rivalries between the different ""cones"" -- or career tracks, referred to by one insider as the ""conal caste system""
-- at the State Department severely impact morale, career growth, and even operations. The report on the Africa bureau
noted that in 2002, public affairs and public diplomacy was a ""failed office"" -- and that the situation is worse in 2009.
Public outreach workers said the bureau's leadership ""does not understand public diplomacy."" The sentiment is
widespread. A 2008 report by a congressional ombudsman, the U.S. Advisory Commission on Public Diplomacy,
described a systemic failure to support and train public diplomacy officers in the field, as well as professional
discrimination against those in the career track.
Attempts to fix the State Department have focused on short-term issues, such as ameliorating its shortages in human
and financial resources. The last eight secretaries of state have attempted to bolster the department by bolstering its
bottom line. No less than Defense Secretary Robert Gates and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Mike
Mullen, have long suggested transferring funds from the Defense Department to State Department. But the situation is
so dire that the State Department, at this point, could not even absorb and spend that much-needed infusion of cash. If
there were a wholesale transfer of funds tomorrow, the lack of capacity and skills at the State department would mean
it would have to give it back to the Defenk Department or dole it out to contractors.
The creeping militarization of U.S. foreign policy is itself deeply worrying, not just to Gates and Mullen, but also to such
luminaries as Secretary Clinton and Vice President Joe Biden. In 2008, then-Senator Biden questioned the ""expanding
role of the military in U.S. foreign policy."" He said he was concerned by the ""migration of functions and authorities from
U.S. civilian agencies to the Department of Defense.""
Some commentators have even wondered aloud whether the best way to fix the State Department might be to destroy
it. Foggy Bottom could retain a small core staff for its embassies and ambassadors. All other functions -- such as public
diplomacy, countering misinformation and propaganda, and development, including provincial reconstruction staffing --
could migrate to the Pentagon or become wholly independent agencies.
But atomizing the State Department would ultimately prove dangerous and further the militarization of foreign policy.
The Pentagon needs a counterbalance, a vertically integrated State Department that the president, Congress, and the
U.S. public can count on. Change, rather than creative destruction, is what Foggy Bottom needs.
Envision a State Department capable of leading whole-of-government initiatives with a strategic focus instead of one
hidebound department geared by structure and tradition to execute state-to-state diplomacy. This ""Department of State
and Non-State"" would be as deft at tackling stateless terrorist networks and hurricanes as it would be at fostering and
upholding alliances with foreign ministers. To transform Foggy Bottom in this way will require breaking the rigid
hierarchy, stovepipes, and bottlenecks which make the Pentagon look lean and dynamic in comparison.
Modern global affairs are not compartmentalized by political borders. Besides expanding the overly shallow and narrow
authorities of the public diplomacy bureau, Clinton must restructure the State Department to focus less on countries
and more on regions. Currently, each of Foggy Bottom's regional bureaus, such as Near East Affairs, is configured to
oversee its patch of embassies. Country desk officers, and most ambassadors, report to an assistant secretary, the
regional head. The assistant secretary in turn reports to an undersecretary, who reports to Clinton.
Clinton should name the regional bureau heads, currently assistant secretaries, to undersecretary status. This would
help eliminate an unnecessary bureaucratic layer and would also align the State Department with the Defense
Department (which has powerful regional commands, such as Centcom and Africom). The State Department's regional
leaders would hold an equivalent civilian rank to four-star combatant commanders like Gen. David Petraeus. These
changes would promise to improve communications, synchronize missions, and put the department on the right path for
today's requirements.
But Clinton should beware reforming the State Department too quickly from within -- her efforts could be paralyzed by a
bureaucracy in mutiny that would simply wait her out. U.S. national security would suffer and the Pentagon's growing
power would become more entrenched. Clinton will need the clear and unequivocal support of the president and more
importantly Congress, which authorizes State Department spending bills, to have a chance at success.
In a burst of activity after Barack Obama's election, Congress authorized more money and people for the
State Department and pushed for greater public diplomacy. Still more is required. The question asked over the last eight
years as the State Department abrogated its various responsibilities -- if not Defense, then who? -- will not, indeed
cannot, be answered until the department steps up to the plate and becomes effective and visible in leading and
implementing U.S. foreign policy. This will take time. But, as the saying goes, there is no time like the present. The
United States now has a Congress that supports change, secretaries of state and defense who want change, a president
whose entire election platform was built around the word ""change,"" and an American public that would be outraged at
the dysfunction if it only knew the details.
3"
3378,###
3379,"Cherie Blair
Monday, September 14, 2009 12:02 PM
H; hr15@mycingular.blackberry.net
psolisdoylE
Sheikha Mosa of Qatar
She is available to see you on 24th September either morning or afternoon? Alternatively 28th or 29th September Does
that work for you
Cherie Blair
This message has been scanned by MailController."
3380,"We'll see what comes of this, but...
Meanwhile, Amorim was in Esfahan, Iran with Mottaki yesterday.
Brazil signals recognition of Honduran election
(AP) –40 minutes ago
RIO DE JANEIRO —A top Brazilian official has signaled that Latin America's largest nation may recognize the Honduran candidate who won
last weekend's post-coup presidential election.
Dilma Rousseff is chief of staff for Brazilian President Luiz !neck) Lula da Silva. Rousseff says the Central American country's Nov. 29 election
should be considered separately from the June 28 coup that ousted ex-President Manuel Zelaya.
Previously, the government had said it would not recognize the election unless Zelaya was returned to office and allowed to serve out his term,
which ends Jan. 27.
Rousseff told Brazilian television late Friday from Germany that the coup ""is one thing"" and ""discussing the election"" another.
She says ""this new process"" — the election — ""has to be considered."""
3381,"Valenzuela, Arturo A <ValenzuelaAA@state.gov>
Saturday, December 5, 2009 3:46 PM
Re: Columbia, Brazil and Honduras
Thanks very much for contacting me-- I just got off a plane in Florida on my way to Mexico for my first visit and
consultations w Carlos Pascual. Return Wed morning.
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
On Honduras we are ok-- despite complications. We maintain a principled position (no to coup), with a realistic one
based on need to have an end game for Honduras. Our formulation that election was necessary but not sufficient —
succeeded in shifting dynamic in many other countries and pushing back on erroneous press reports alleging
administration vacillation.
B5
Best regards,
Arturo"
3382,"The below is from Karl Eikenberry, who recommends you call Karzai. Richard wrote in to second what Karl wrote.
Recommended talking points:"
3383,"I will lock in in this morning.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
(202) 647-9071"
3384,Ok
3385,"We could reach out in the next couple of hours or alternatively early tomorrow. The Eikenberry points sent last night,
plus Holbrooke's add'n, provide a good roadmap.
Let us know how you'd like to proceed."
3386,-
3387,"Will do.
Toiv, Nora F <ToivNF@state.gov>
Tuesday, September 15, 2009 7:21 AM
H; cheryl.mills
Re: Branch Summary"
3388,"Got a readout from Rich. We still have work to do on the cables, which we'll do at our session with Eikenberry
tomorrow. The July 2011 date was a trouble spot too -- but there is no excuse for that and that got mostly sorted by the
end.
Everything else was good.
My sincere apologies for missing elements of prep today -- I had to deal with some personal stuff that unfortunately
interfered.
Rich and I have organized a session for tomorrow to nail things down with Karl."
3389,"PIR <preines B6
Tuesday, September 15, 2009 8:39 AM
Diane Reynolds; H
Re: Branch's book
I happen to have a mtg this morning with Cheryl to walk her through the book, I'll send you a summary afterwards."
3390,"Absolutely.
PIR <preines
Tuesday, September 15, 2009 8:42 AM
Diane Reynolds; H
Re: Branch's book"
3393,"Cheryl Mills <
Sunday, December 6, 2009 9:39 PM
Fwd: Charles Blow in NYT today
EF1
December 5, 2009
Op-Ed Columnist
Black in the Age of Obama
By CHARLES M. BLOW
A hundred and fifty years ago, Charles Dickens opened ""A Tale of Two Cities"" with the now-famous phrase:
""It was the best of times, it was the worst of times. ...""
Those words resonated with me recently while contemplating the impact of the Obama presidency on blacks in
America. So far, it's been mixed. Blacks are living a tale of two Americas — one of the ascension of the first
black president with the cultural capital that accrues; the other of a collapsing quality of life and amplified racial
tensions, while supporting a president who is loath to even acknowledge their pain, let alone commiserate in it.
Last year, blacks dared to dream anew, envisioning a future in which Obama's election would be the catalyst for
an era of prosperity and more racial harmony. Now that the election's afterglow has nearly faded, the hysteria of
hope is being ground against the hard stone of reality. Things have not gotten better. In many ways, they've
gotten worse.
The recession, for one, has dealt a particularly punishing and uneven hand to blacks.
A May report from the Pew Research Center found that blacks were the most likely to get higher-priced
subprime loans, leading to higher foreclosure rates. In fact, blacks have displaced Hispanics as the group with
the lowest homeownership rates.
According to the most recent jobs data, not only is the unemployment rate for blacks nearly twice that of whites,
the gap in some important demographics has widened rapidly since Obama took office. The unemployment rate
over that time for white college graduates under 24 years old grew by about 20 percent. For their black cohorts,
the rate grew by about twice that much.
And a report published last month by the Department of Agriculture found that in 2008, ""food insecurity"" for
American households had risen to record levels, with black children being the most likely to experience that
food insecurity.
Things on the racial front are just as bad.
We are now inundated with examples of overt racism on a scale to which we are unaccustomed. Any protester
with a racist poster can hijack a news cycle, while a racist image can live forever on the Internet. In fact, racially
offensive images of the first couple are so prolific online that Google now runs an apologetic ad with the results
of image searches of them.
And it's not all words and images; it's actions as well. According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's 2008
hate crimes data released last week, anti-black hate crimes rose 4 percent from 2007, while the combined hate
crimes against all other racial categories declined 11 percent. If you look at the two-year trend, which would
include Obarna's ascension as a candidate, anti-black hate crimes have risen 8 percent, while those against the
other racial groups have fallen 19 percent.
This has had a sobering effect on blacks. According to a Nov. 9 report from Gallup, last summer 23 percent of
blacks thought that race relations would get a lot better with the election of Obama. Now less than half that
percentage says that things have actually gotten a lot better.
The racial animosity that Obama's election has stirred up may have contributed to a rallying effect among
blacks. According to a Gallup report published on Nov. 24, Obama's approval rating among whites has dropped
to 39 percent, but among blacks it remains above 90 percent.
Also, this hasn't exactly been a good year for black men in the news. Plaxico Burress was locked up for
accidentally shooting off a gun in a club. Henry Louis Gates Jr. was locked up for intentionally shooting off his
mouth at his own home. And Michael Jackson died after being shot full of propofol. Chris Brown brutally beat
Rihanna. Former Representative William Jefferson was convicted. And most recently, the ""personal failings"" of
Tiger Woods portray him as an alley cat. Meanwhile, the most critically acclaimed black movie of the year,
""Precious,"" features a black man who rapes and twice impregnates his own daughter. Rooting for the president
feels like a nice counterbalance.
However, the rallying creates a conundrum for blacks: how to air anxiety without further arming Obama's
enemies. This dilemma has rendered blacks virtually voiceless on some pressing issues at a time when their
voices would have presumably held greater sway.
This means that Obama can get away with doing almost nothing to specifically address issues important to
African-Americans and instead focus on the white voters he's losing in droves. This has not gone unnoticed. In
the Nov. 9 Gallup poll, the number of blacks who felt that Obama would not go far enough in promoting efforts
to aid the black community jumped 60 percent from last summer to now.
The hard truth is that Obama needs white voters more than he needs black ones.
According to my analysis, even if every black person in America had stayed home on Election Day, Obama
would still be president. To a large degree, Obama was elected by white people, some of whom were more able
to accept him because he consciously portrayed himself as racially ambiguous.
In fact, commiserating with the blacks could prove politically problematic.
In a study to be published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences this month,
researchers asked subjects to rate images of the president to determine which ones best represented his ""true
essence."" In some of the photos, his skin had been lightened. In others, it had been darkened. The result? The
more people identified him with the ""whiter"" images, the more likely they were to have voted for him, and vice
versa.
The Age of Obama, so far at least, seems less about Obama as a black community game-changer than as a
White House gamesman. It's unclear if there will be a positive Obama Effect, but an Obama Backlash is
increasingly apparent. Meanwhile, black people are also living a tale of two actions: grin and bear it.
Forwarded message"
3394,Yes! Forthcoming
3395,Fyi
3397,"Thank you for your message. I am out of the office today with intermittent access to email.
If you need immediate assistance, please call Joanne Laszczych at 202-647-5548.
Thank you.
cdm"
3398,"Happy new year to you and Bill--and Chelsea! Congrats on the upcoming marriage. A good sign, I hope, that this year will
be better. Onward, upward. Sid"
3399,"sbwhoeop
Friday, January 1, 2010 12:27 PM
Re: Happy New Year!
And read Krugman today in nyt"
3400,Got it. It's on my list to track down today.
3401,"Great - let's do 730 your time.
XO"
3402,"Krugman, in case you haven't seen:
January 1, 2010
Op-Ed Columnist
Chinese New Year
By PAUL KRUGMAN
It's the season when pundits traditionally make predictions about the year ahead. Mine concerns international economics:
I predict that 2010 will be the year of China. And not in a good way.
Actually, the biggest problems with China involve climate change. But today I want to focus on currency policy.
China has become a major financial and trade power. But it doesn't act like other big economies. Instead, it follows a
mercantilist policy, keeping its trade surplus artificially high. And in today's depressed world, that policy is, to put it bluntly,
predatory.
Here's how it works: Unlike the dollar, the euro or the yen, whose values fluctuate freely, China's currency is pegged by
official policy at about 6.8 yuan to the dollar. At this exchange rate, Chinese manufacturing has a large cost advantage
over its rivals, leading to huge trade surpluses.
Under normal circumstances, the inflow of dollars from those surpluses would push up the value of China's currency,
unless it was offset by private investors heading the other way. And private investors are trying to get into China, not out
of it. But China's government restricts capital inflows, even as it buys up dollars and parks them abroad, adding to a $2
trillion-plus hoard of foreign exchange reserves.
This policy is good for China's export-oriented state-industrial complex, not so good for Chinese consumers. But what
about the rest of us?
In the past, China's accumulation of foreign reserves, many of which were invested in American bonds, was arguably
doing us a favor by keeping interest rates low — although what we did with those low interest rates was mainly to inflate a
housing bubble. But right now the world is awash in cheap money, looking for someplace to go. Short-term interest rates
are close to zero; long-term interest rates are higher, but only because investors expect the zero-rate policy to end some
day. China's bond purchases make little or no difference.
Meanwhile, that trade surplus drains much-needed demand away from a depressed world economy. My back-of-the-
envelope calculations suggest that for the next couple of years Chinese mercantilism may end up reducing U.S.
employment by around 1.4 million jobs.
The Chinese refuse to acknowledge the problem. Recently Wen Jiabao, the prime minister, dismissed foreign complaints:
""On one hand, you are asking for the yuan to appreciate, and on the other hand, you are taking all kinds of protectionist
measures."" Indeed: other countries are taking (modest) protectionist measures precisely because China refuses to let its
currency rise. And more such measures are entirely appropriate.
Or are they? I usually hear two reasons for not confronting China over its policies. Neither holds water.
First, there's the claim that we can't confront the Chinese because they would wreak havoc with the U.S. economy by
dumping their hoard of dollars. This is all wrong, and not just because in so doing the Chinese would inflict large losses on
themselves. The larger point is that the same forces that make Chinese mercantilism so damaging right now also mean
that China has little or no financial leverage.
Again, right now the world is awash in cheap money. So if China were to start selling dollars, there's no reason to think it
would significantly raise U.S. interest rates. It would probably weaken the dollar against other currencies — but that would
be good, not bad, for U.S. competitiveness and employment. So if the Chinese do dump dollars, we should send them a
thank-you note."
3403,"Is at 7pm in the Jockey Club of the Fairfax Hotel
2100 Massachusetts Avenue Northwest"
3404,"Jack is having 7pm dinner at fairfax hotel with eikenberry and petreaus which is right down the street from u on mass
avenue. Monica can make make sure u get in ok if u want to go."
3405,"Thank you for such a lovely note. Life
seems very sweet indeed this New Year's Day, and all the more so with the privilege of doing meaningful and important
work with a great team of people and a leader whom I am proud to serve. It has been quite a journey indeed, one that
has been hard at times, but immensely rewarding. Happy New Year, and here's to a great 2010.
AM"
3406,Lauren can meet you there if you decide to go.
3407,"As I mentioned, you will be receiving a binder of NPR documents tonight. I mischaracterized the structure of the
binder. The cover note is merely an extended table of contents, and behind it are six 2- or 3-pagers on the six major
questions on which they seek your guidance. The papers are technical, and some are easier to read than others, but it is
worth a quick scan tonight before they march through them tomorrow."
3408,Okay- I just left. Lew and patraeus are both there.
3410,"Good question. Strobe will know the answer on good sounding boards. I know that he spends a fair amount of time
with nonpro/arms control types of all stripes. I will check in with him."
3411,"jpg
The new year is bound to bring in a continuing wave of crisis around the world. Consider this photo a
momentary respite. It is evocative of the good feeling you engender everywhere. The photo is of the Director
of New Life Center in Chiang Mai. They are doing incredible work there and have made exceptional progress
since your visit. They remember you with great gratitude. I had one of your signed photos left after
distributing the others to the Burmese women human rights leaders (who also felt that you were on their
side).
Everywhere I went over the holidays, there was much favorable comment about your leadership. I'm so proud
to be back working with you. Because you've created such ripples of hope, we've got so much to do!
Love to all the Clintons and best wishes for a healthy, happy, productive and rewarding New Year.
<<New Life Center Foundation 2009.jpg»"
3412,"Madame Secretary —
Many thanks for taking the time to meet the family today. They were thrilled to meet you (and I enjoyed the
break from the Ukrainians...)
Best,
Phil"
3414,"Thank you and a very happy new year to you both!
Will make sure to add to the calendar."
3416,Ok
3417,"I am out of the office, back on November 30."
3418,"8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am VVEEICLY MEETING w/REGIONAL BUREAU SECRETARIES
10:00 am Deputy Secretary's Conference Room
10:00 am PRIVATE MEETING w/ BRADY WILLIAMSON
10:15 am Secretary's Office
10:30 am BILATERAL w/CROATIAN FOREIGN MINISTER GORDAN
11:00 am JANDROKOVIC Secy's Conf. Room *Official photo in East Hall preceding.
11:00 am USG PRESS PRE-BRIEF
11:05 am Secretary's Office
11:05 am JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/CROATIAN FOREIGN
11:15 am MINISTER GORDAN JANDROKOVIC Treaty Room
11:30 am PHONE CALL w/ BRAZILIAN FM CELSO AMORIM
11:40 am Secretary's Office
11:40 am OFFICE TIME
12:30 pm Secretary's Office
12:30 pm PHONE CALL w/ MALAYSIAN FM ANIFAH AMAN
12:40 pm Secretary's office
12:40 am OFFICE TIME
1:15 pm Secretary's Office
1:15 pm VIDEO CONFERENCE TO THE ELEANOR ROOSEVELT
1:45 pm LIFETIME ACHIEVEMENT AWARD IN HUMAN RIGHTS
Principals Conference Room 7516
2:00 pm DEPARTMENT OF STATE'S ANNUAL RETIREMENT
3:00 pm (t) CEREMONY Dean Acheson Auditorium, First Floor
3:00 pm PRESS TIME
3:30 pm 8"" Floor or Marshall Room
4:00 pm PRIVATE MEETING w/ JOE DIMENTO
4:10 pm Secretary's Office
4:15 pm OFFICE TIME
6:45 pm Secretary's Office
6:45 pm (t) HOLIDAY RECEPTION FOR MEMBERS OF THE PRESS
7:15 pm (t) Jefferson and Adams Rooms, eFloor
7:20 pm DEPART State Department *En route Private Residence
7:30 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
3419,"There are a number of different possibilities for how the decision on the Guinea/Madagascar credentials may go
tomorrow. (It is Zambia and Tanzania bringing the challenge on behalf of the AU.) I was under the impression that we
would not have to vote on the potential credentials challenges. We may have to.
We may have to vote on a motion to *deny* them credentials and exclude them. For the moment, the guidance is to
vote to credential all countries — including these two — as is customary, while conducting outreach with Tanzania,
Zambia, and the AU to exnlain that WP have our own imnpratives hut ma cunnnrt thp fart that they are taking a
principled stand.
We may have to vote on a motion to *defer* decision, which would allow them to be seated and vote but would not
formally grant credentials. For the moment, the guidance is to potentially support such a motion — this was the practice
with respect to South Africa between 1983 and 1994. Everyone is in the same place on this.
Ultimately, however, the whole thing may die of its own weight. This is probably the most likely outcome."
3420,"Importance: High
ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE/ATTORNEY WORK-PRODUCT
And Happy New Year to you (and your family) too! I am so thrilled to be in this job and working with you. I am having a
great time, and hope to have an even better 2010.
Re Blackwater. I have already put these very questions to our team, and they are working up a memo on the subject.
Significantly, the press accounts are all saying that State Department lawyers appropriately warned the DOJ prosecutors,
but that the DOJ lawyers chose to take a different route.
My initial reactions to your questions are as follows:
I will keep pressing and give you an oral report at Monday's 8:45, and we can get the promised memo to you soon
thereafter.
Please let me know if you need more.
Best
Harold
For"
3421,"B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Yes. (Sorry for late response -- been driving in Thanksgiving traffic to Ohio.)
Jeffrey Feltman"
3422,"December 15, 2009
For: Hillary"
3423,"ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE/ATTORNEY WORK-PRODUCT
Ok. Will do."
3424,"Cover story in the Economist this week. Very big issue when I was in Japan and Korea. Korean parliamentarians want to
get women and economic growth on the G20 agenda when they have the lead next year and we are advocating for Japan
to advance the issue at APEC which they are leading this year.
On another note, so sad about Smith Bagley. He was a good person and was one of your biggest fans.
Women and work
We did it!
Dec 30th 2009
From The Economist print edition
The rich world's quiet revolution: women are
gradually taking over the workplace
Getty Images
AT A time when the world is short of causes for celebration, here is a candidate:
within the next few months women will cross the 50% threshold and become the
majority of the American workforce. Women already make up the majority of
university graduates in the OECD countries and the majority of professional
workers in several rich countries, including the United States. Women run many
of the world's great companies, from PepsiCo in America to Areva in France.
Women's economic empowerment is arguably the biggest social change of our
times. Just a generation ago, women were largely confined to repetitive, menial
jobs. They were routinely subjected to casual sexism and were expected to
abandon their careers when they married and had children. Today they are
running some of the organisations that once treated them as second-class
citizens. Millions of women have been given more control over their own lives.
And millions of brains have been put to more productive use. Societies that try to
resist this trend—most notably the Arab countries, but also Japan and some
southern European countries—will pay a heavy price in the form of wasted talent
and frustrated citizens.
This revolution has been achieved with only a modicum of friction (see article).
Men have, by and large, welcomed women's invasion of the workplace. Yet even
the most positive changes can be incomplete or unsatisfactory. This particular
advance comes with two stings. The first is that women are still under-
represented at the top of companies. Only 2% of the bosses of America's largest
companies and 5% of their peers in Britain are women. They are also paid
significantly less than men on average. The second is that juggling work and
child-rearing is difficult. Middle-class couples routinely complain that they have
too little time for their children. But the biggest losers are poor children—
particularly in places like America and Britain that have combined high levels of
female participation in the labour force with a reluctance to spend public money
on child care.
Dealing with the juggle
These two problems are closely related. Many women feel they have to choose
between their children and their careers. Women who prosper in high-pressure
companies during their 20s drop out in dramatic numbers in their 30s and then
find it almost impossible to regain their earlier momentum. Less-skilled women
are trapped in poorly paid jobs with hand-to-mouth child-care arrangements.
Motherhood, not sexism, is the issue: in America, childless women earn almost as
much as men, but mothers earn significantly less. And those mothers' relative
poverty also disadvantages their children.
Demand for female brains is helping to alleviate some of these problems. Even if
some of the new theories about warm-hearted women making inherently superior
workers are bunk (see article), several trends favour the more educated sex,
including the ""war for talent"" and the growing flexibility of the workplace. Law
firms, consultancies and banks are rethinking their ""up or out"" promotion systems
because they are losing so many able women. More than 90% of companies in
Germany and Sweden allow flexible working. And new technology is making it
easier to redesign work in all sorts of family-friendly ways.
Women have certainly performed better over the past decade than men. In the
European Union women have filled 6m of the 8m new jobs created since 2000. In
America three out of four people thrown out of work since the ""mancession""
began have been male. And the shift towards women is likely to continue: by
2011 there will be 2.6m more female than male university students in America.
The light hand of the state
All this argues, mostly, for letting the market do the work. That has not stopped
calls for hefty state intervention of the Scandinavian sort. Norway has used
threats of quotas to dramatic effect. Some 40% of the legislators there are
women. All the Scandinavian countries provide plenty of state-financed nurseries.
They have the highest levels of female employment in the world and far fewer of
the social problems that plague Britain and America. Surely, comes the argument,
there is a way to speed up the revolution—and improve the tough lives of many
working women and their children?
If that means massive intervention, in the shape of affirmative-action
programmes and across-the-board benefits for parents of all sorts, the answer is
no. To begin with, promoting people on the basis of their sex is illiberal and
unfair, and stigmatises its beneficiaries. And there are practical problems. Lengthy
periods of paid maternity leave can put firms off hiring women, which helps
explain why most Swedish women work in the public sector and Sweden has a
lower proportion of women in management than America does.
But there are plenty of cheaper, subtler ways in which governments can make life
easier for women. Welfare states were designed when most women stayed at
home. They need to change the way they operate. German schools, for instance,
close at midday. American schools shut down for two months in the summer.
These things can be changed without huge cost. Some popular American charter
schools now offer longer school days and shorter summer holidays. And, without
going to Scandinavian lengths, America could invest more in its children: it
spends a lower share of its GDP on public child-care than almost any other rich
country, and is the only rich country that refuses to provide mothers with paid
maternity leave. Barack Obama needs to measure up to his campaign rhetoric
about ""real family values"".
Still, these nagging problems should not overshadow the dramatic progress that
women have made in recent decades. During the second world war, when
America's menfolk were off at the front, the government had to summon up the
image of Rosie the Riveter, with her flexed muscle and ""We Can Do It"" slogan, to
encourage women into the workforce. Today women are marching into the
workplace in ever larger numbers and taking a sledgehammer to the remaining
glass ceilings."
3425,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, January 3, 2010 10:01 AM
H: They asked for 250 words and I wrote slightly more, briefly on China. Sid
2010: global cracks, human prospects (part II)
No•
a■iid Hayes, 2 January 2010
Subjects:
• Democracy and government
• International politics
More openDemocracy authors reflect on a volcanic decade in global politics - continued from part I
openDemocracy deputy editor David Hayes asked openDemocracy writers to reflect on the decade that has passed and
the one that lies ahead by considering three questions:
1)What was the most significant trend in the century's first decade?
2) What do you most hope for, and most fear, about the decade to come?
3) What idea do you see fading and/or emerging in 2010 and beyond?
• Sidney Blumenthal
The greatest challenge for the early 21st century is that China's leadership has contempt for much of the international
order and many of the international organisations developed since the second world war. In pursuit of its narrow and even
crude understanding of its interest, China will constantly abuse and break international rules, protocols and bodies. Its
willful destruction of the Copenhagen summit on climate change reveals the pattern. Its mercantile currency policy in a
beggar-thy-neighbour approach, environmental degradation, and disdain for human rights and the rule of law generally
are the obvious reflections of its despotism. Through its rough and strange neo-imperialism, in Africa especially but also
elsewhere, China is able to gain help, partly through economic intimidation, in its international forays to repel or strike
down the responsibilities of internationalism.
Internally, China is a prison of nations, an empire similar to imperial Russia and the Soviet Union, and may also be the
most unequal industrial country in distribution of income. China's power is increasing, but the authoritarian regime is
hardly the wave of the future as some awestruck worshippers of raw power and money (whether investment bankers or
ex-Marxists) imagine. The system is inherently unstable, which accounts for its rigid currency policy (at root a fear of
operating on other than a virtual slave-labour standard, of turning its poverty-stricken millions into consumers with real
choice, and ultimately of letting go even a little bit).
In the long-term the tyranny of the one-party state and its military rule is at odds with the new economic classes of
entrepreneurs and professionals it has fostered. China's growing economic power is accompanied by expanding
arrogance, demonstrated not least in the incivility and rudeness with which President Obama was treated on his trip there.
China's regime lacks an ideal other than a communist gloss on Confucian uniformity, itself based incoherently on reckless
economic development, for example in the areas of currency, environment and labour; it has no ""soft power"", not just
because of the coarseness of its supposed diplomacy, but also because its cultural appeal does not travel. China forces
its way through coercion of one sort or another.
The next decade will see how flexible or inflexible its rulers are and how secure their system is. The brief effort at a
rhetorical gesture by some in the Obama administration who floated the turgid phrase ""strategic reassurance"" was risible
and did not last. For now, the west has no policy to deal with China as it is. The place to begin is on currency.
The most powerful idea for the 21st century is the equality of women. It is the idea most feared by those - from the Vatican
to the Taliban - arrayed against modernity, the still vibrant project of the Enlightenment. Someday the United States may
even have a woman president. It took fifty years after granting the vote to African-Americans to pass a constitutional
amendment giving it to women. Perhaps the distance between electing the first African-American president and the first
female one will not be so great.
Sidney Blumenthal is former senior adviser to President Clinton, and an Oscar and Emmy award-winning documentary
producer. He is writing a book on Abraham Lincoln
Also by Sidney Blumenthal:
""The choice"" (21 November 2007)"
3426,FYI
3427,"We'll have the specials summarize the key points of the memcons and circulate them to RCH and senior NSC folks, if that
works for you."
3428,Here it is -- came in overnight. Huma will have copy for you this morning.
3429,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 17, 2010 10:09 AM
H
FW: URGENT: Friends of Haiti Teleconference
Copying you as heads up for your 1pm call only —not for decision.
cdm
From Abedin, Huma
Sent: Sunday, January 17, 2010 10:00 AM
To: Jacobson, Roberta S; S_SpecialAssistants; Valmoro, Lona J; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Reynoso, Julissa; Kelly, Craig A; Valenzuela, Arturo A; Gonzalez, Juan S
Subject: Re: URGENT: Friends of Haiti Teleconference
Cheryl needs to address"
3431,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 17, 2010 10:56 AM
H
Fw: Rep. Meek is Haiti - details"
3432,Will do on both counts.
3433,We are meeting with you at noon to discuss.
3434,I have asked about the abstention possibility and they are looking into the mechanics.
3435,Ok
3436,Sounds good.
3437,Fyi
3438,"8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:20 am REMARKS TO THE DIPLOMACY CONFERENCE ON LATIN
9:50 am AMERICA Marshall Auditorium
10:00am PHONE CALL w/FRENCH FM BERNARD KOUCHNER
10:15am Secretary's Office
10:15 am PHONE CALL w/DR. HENRY KISSINGER
10:30 am Secretary's Office
10:30 am SPEECH PREP TIME
11:30 am Secretary's Office
11:30 am WEEKLY MEETING w/UN AMBASSADOR SUSAN RICE
12:00 pm Secretary's Office
12:00 pm PRE-BRIEF FOR KISSINGER INTERVIEW
12:30 pm Secretary's Office (Jake, PJ and Philippe)
12:30 pm PRIVATE MEETING w/ Joe Wilson
12:50 pm Secretary's Office
1:00 pm HOLIDAY RECEPTION FOR NEA AND WHA
2:00 pm Benjamin Franklin Room, 8' Floor *Approx. 300 ppl expected.
2:05 pm DEPART State Department *En route Andrews AFB
2:30 pm ARRIVE Andrews AFB
2:35 pm DEPART En route New York-LaGuardia Airport
3:25 pm ARRIVE New York, New York-LaGuardia Airport
Contact: FBO SheltAir Office 718-779-4040
3:30 pm DEPART LaGuardia Airport *En route OTR
4:30 pm OTR
5:30 pm Location: Tbd
5:30 pm DEPART OTR *En route Park Avenue
6:00 pm ARRIVE Park Avenue
6:00 pm NEWSWEEK INTERVIEW w/DR. HENRY KISSINGER
7:00 pm Dr. Kissinger's Office, 350 Park Avenue (between 51't and 52n1 Streets)
7:05 pm DEPART Park Avenue *En route Cipriani's
7:25 pm ARRIVE Cipriani's
7:30 pm KEYNOTE ADDRESS TO THE AMERICAN PAKISTAN
8:30 pm FOUNDATION'S INAUGURAL GALA Cipriani's at 42nd Street
8:35 pm DEPART Cipriani's *En route Private Residence"
3439,This is what you should have lust gotten
3440,"Tamera, we are so excited you are keeping tradition this year!"
3441,Fyi - background for call sheet you will get
3442,Marina told me she left. I'm faxing to secret service. Dan will make sure u get it
3443,"If you want us to send a hard-copy note, we can do that too. Betsy is concerned you might have the wrong e-mail
address for him."
3444,"I'm checking with one person, but no further Intel on my end yet
But don't think Mark's writing, just fishing - unless the WH gave it to the Times, but there's no way they'd handle you
that way
Let me confirm that point, which is important to know"
3445,"Landler has called me twice -- I haven't called back because I don't want to go down the road.
I talked to Matt and off-handedly asked about the issue -- he said that people are deeply unhappy with our friend, but
not much else. Said he didn't think anything was imminent. But it was not a very optimistic conversation."
3447,"They are trying to report this out, but not writing imminently"
3448,"I went back upstairs with Dr Kissinger and we talked about it. I regret the seating, it just begged Meacham to interview
you, to ask a question, then alternate answering. Was just a very different dynamic than you two before the sitdown. It
would be bad TV. But it's print.
So as an observer, and I think this will come across to the reader, it was a fascinating meeting of two eras that are very
different but very the same. Two very different people, but the same job, experiencing it much the same way. His spiel
at the end about the goal should be more than ending the war will translate well.
And most importantly, the photos look great
He was also a sport and called my friend and talked for 10 mins about non-proliferation"
3449,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, January 17, 2010 12:53 PM
H
1pm call manifest
We now have confirmed participation by Brazil/Amorim; France/Kouchner; Haiti/PM; Chile, Uruguay, Peru at ministerial
level; Argentina, Mexico, and Costa Rica at Vice Min level. UN has committed to high-level participation as well,"
3450,"There are a few things I sent to oscar to print:
- revised AfPak strategy overview memo that came from holbrookes office.
- prep paper from rich for testimony next week.
-a draft copy of the action memo and report on Kerry-Lugar-Berman that Jake wanted you to see this weekend. the
final package will be in dc Sunday night. The report is due to Congress on Monday."
3451,FYI
3452,Yes will do.
3453,"Contacting with wha now. Frattini would have to cancel his trip so we would have to re-schedule for another date or just
do in context of one of these multilateral meetings. He has a big speech in italy on the 26th."
3454,Give me a few minutes
3455,"Importance:
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Sunday, January 3, 2010 1:53 PM
Abedin, Huma
FW: 2009-12-31 Lewis Work Plan
2009-12-31 Lewis Department Notice.docx; 2009-12-31 Lewis Work Plan.docx
High
HRC:
Per our conversation, she advised I could forward this — it will also come through channels.
cdm"
3456,"III confirm if he'll be there for london.
As for paris, looks like sarkozy will be there but we won't know for sure till tomorrow. So it would mean sarkozy meeting,
speech and kouchner around 6pm when he's back from davos."
3457,Checking.
3458,"Hi,
Attached is a new draft in which I have tried to pack in the changes/additions you requested yesterday (as well
as Cheryl's and Lissa's suggested edits).
To use a metaphor (or rather simile) of the season, we are at the stage where it's a bit like decorating a
Christmas tree: trying to hang the ornaments so no branch bends too much, and so the whole tree stays upright.
I wanted to get it to you first, but will circulate to the others now, and can send to Oscar if that's helpful in terms
of getting you a hard copy.
Dan"
3460,I am on official travel until sometime on December 18. I will have periodic access to e-mails on this system.
3462,"Will happily do. The French Legal adviser Edwidge Belliard was very excited to meet you at lunch in DC a few months ago
and I just saw her in the Hague on Wed. So Jeff--will stand by for your instructions Harold Harold Hongju Koh The Legal
Adviser U.S. Department of State Suite 6421
2201 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20520-6421
202 647 9598 office
202 647 7096 fax"
3463,Got it -- will follow up. Has Tom been in touch? Matt said he would be this morning.
3464,Yes will do.
3465,"Feltman, Jeffrey D <FeltmanJD©state.gov>
Saturday, December 12, 2009 11:29 AM
H; Koh, Harold Hongju
Re: Guinea
I have left a message on the phone number of my French counterpart. I am sure he'll call me back, as he always does.
Jeffrey Feltman"
3466,"Harold, we told the Moroccans they have a couple of options.
Other ideas welcome!
Jeffrey Feltman"
3467,That sounds like a good menu. We are seeing if there are other options and will get back to you
3468,"I. Introduction
The next six months will be a critical time for establishing the Department's leadership in
bridging relationships for U.S. intergovernmental officials and their foreign counterparts,
defining the mission and role of the Office of the Special Representative for Global
Intergovernmental Affairs (""S/SRGIA""), and outlining an agenda that serves the needs of the
Department and these officials. Our approach will be strategic and integrated, working in
collaboration with Department bureaus and USAID offices to strengthen and deliver on the
Secretary's and Administration's priorities.
II. Key Objectives
The Special Representative for Global Intergovernmental Affairs will serve the global
needs of the U.S. intergovernmental officials and the entities they represent. The S/SRGIA will
also connect U.S. state and local officials with intergovernmental officials around the world,
promote local capacity building investments and programs to enhance country-led processes, and
facilitate the needs and goals of intergovernmental officials here and abroad consistent with
Department priorities.
III. Next Steps
This work plan describes activities that the S/SRGIA plans to initiate, grow and
implement in the next six months. To place the Work Plan in context, we describe below
S/SRGIA' s work-planning process.
A. Establish S/SRGIA Mission and Role in the Department.
Currently, no one and no office in the State Department has accountability to serve the
needs of intergovernmental officials, (e.g., Governors, Mayors, local elected leaders, the entities
that represent them) with respect to their global affairs portfolios. State and local officials'
concerns are typically routed on an individual basis through bureaus with the results reflecting ,
the priority of the person in the bureau's estimation or the nature of the request. Priority
activities will be as follows:
1
Sensitive But Unclassified
• Confirm the Secretary's support to focus on priority issues and countries;
• Join Department's meetings and conversations with visiting foreign state and local
representatives and dignitaries to establish S/SRGIA's role;
• Strengthen support on global intergovernmental affairs issues internally in the State
Department, by explaining the value of these stakeholders;
• Track deployment of resources assisting intergovernmental officials and leverage the
State Department's collective U.S. and global intergovernmental relationships;
• Follow and interpret international issues (e.g., food security, global health, climate
change, trade and economic development, energy) of importance to state governments;
• Promote dialogue between the Department (e.g., USAID, EEB, ECA, Public Private
Partnerships, Global Women's Issues, Consular Affairs, MCC and targeted Regional
Bureaus) and external constituents (e.g., Governors, Mayors, local elected officials, and
the entities that they represent) for more effective partnerships and relationships; and
• Collaborate with the Public Diplomacy and INR to create a survey of foreign
intergovernmental affairs officials to determine their needs and engage U.S.
intergovernmental officials to learn how the Department should help to further their
global goals.
B. Conduct Stakeholder Outreach: Obtain first-hand understanding of the needs of
U.S. intergovernmental officials.
State economies are increasingly globalized, and more and more U.S. companies are
competing in international markets and against firms worldwide. As the principal stewards of
their states' economic success, Governors recognize that the global marketplace presents both
challenges and opportunities and that states must address both to ensure their continued
competitiveness. Thus, S/SRGIA will develop its global intergovernmental affairs outreach
activities in partnership with its participating US and other intergovernmental and international
organizations. U.S. national organizations who serve governmental authorities include but are
not limited to the following:
• National Governors Association;
• National Lt. Governors Association;
• U.S. Conference of Mayors;
• National League of Cities;
• National Association of Counties/Large Urban County Caucus;
• National Association of States Attorney Generals;
• National State Legislatures; and
• Councils of State Governments.
Outreach is essential to many aspects of the Department's activities. S/SRGIA's outreach
objective is to promote and increase the general awareness of the benefits of the State
Department efforts in global intergovernmental affairs, especially among decision makers and
policy makers, educational entities, non-governmental organizations, public-interest groups and
public agencies. S/SRGIA will provide international outreach services to state and local elected
officials in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and all other inhabited U.S.
territories. Specific objectives are to:
2
Sensitive But Unclassified
• Build state by state profiles, thus creating a set of priorities and identifying opportunities
for collaboration with state and local officials on their global projects and Department
priorities;
• Establish our target list of public officials to assist and nurture relationships with
principals and the organizations that represent them and their global needs;
• Create dialogue with the Governors and Mayors in preparation for the NGA and Mayors
Washington conferences in the fall;
• Travel to conferences and meetings within the United States and countries abroad
required to implement the Department's global intergovernmental affairs agenda;
• Develop a network of leaders, to collaborate and create partnerships;
• Coordinate meetings between Department of State experts and state and local officials;
• Support targeted elected officials trade missions and other official trips abroad;
• Develop a strategy for deliverables such as multilateral pacts and Memorandum of
Understandings on key State Department priorities that we will sign with responsible
parties; and
• Collaboration with EEB, to partner with them to engage state and local government
leaders in the bureaus enhanced commercial diplomacy efforts (e.g. the Administration's
National Export Initiative and EEB/Consular Affairs Business Visa Facilitation initiative,
etc.).
C. Conduct Stakeholder Outreach: Obtain first-hand understanding of the needs of
middle and senior foreign intergovernmental affairs officials.
Currently, ECA conducts a significant number of exchanges with foreign and
domestic government officials. None of ECA's programs target regions with the
objective of enhancing another country's government systems because the bureau's
authorities do not permit any type of training since everything must be done under the
auspices of enhancing mutual understanding. The most visible ECA program is the
International Visitor Leadership Program which in FY09 brought in 1,390 foreign
government officials at the state, city and national levels to gain knowledge around the
US political system and culture. To date, the bureau estimates the same number of
government visitors in FY10.
Thus, S/SRGIA will develop its global intergovernmental affairs outreach activities in
partnership with international organizations. International organizations who serve local
governmental authorities include but are not limited to the following:
• United Cities and Local Governments;
• Metropolis;
• The World Urban Forum;
• UN-HABITAT;
• Latin American and Caribbean Ministers of Housing and Urbanization;
• UN Advisory Committee of Local Authorities;
• The World Mayors Council on Climate Change;
3
Sensitive But Unclassified
• Sister Cities International;
• Local Governments for Sustainability; and
• Municipal Development Partnerships which targets governments in Africa.
Priority activities will be as follows:
• S/SRGIA will collaborate with Public Diplomacy to conduct stakeholder outreach
with strategic countries — e.g. Af, Pak, Iraq — and key emerging powers (Brazil,
India, Indonesia, South Africa, Nigeria) and developing countries (Rwanda,
Ethiopia, Kenya, etc.) to obtain first-hand understanding of the needs of middle
and senior foreign intergovernmental affairs officials;
• Collaborate with [NR to assist us in gaining a better understanding of what
foreign intergovernmental affairs officials want to engage with their US
counterparts ranging from engagement on a host of common policy concerns,
opportunities, programs and connections.
D. Provide Leadership for Department Intergovernmental Capacity Building.
One of our largest challenges in most developing countries is the lack of capacity in the
government below the President and Prime Minister level. As the Department seeks to
implement development programs or conduct diplomacy, there is often limited local counterpart
capacity to do so with or to empower. S/SRGIA will work with USAID and State bureaus and
offices to provide connections and leadership development to build the capacity of
intergovernmental officials in countries around the world. Currently, millions of dollars of
USAID and ECA grants that support capacity building are typically carried out by contractors
and have results that are not transparent in their reporting or impact. S/SRGIA will partner with
existing offices to provide leadership for the investment in this space, accountability for the
outcomes and programming, and foster relationships between intergovernmental officials here in
the US with foreign partners to mentor and model what is needed.
S/SRGIA capacity building strategies will primarily be based on best practices derived
from studying successful and less-successful approaches. Within the next six months, S/SRGIA
will work in partnership with Department and USAID bureaus and resources. Priority activities
will be as follows:
• Identify State Department investments, canvass additional State Department dedicated
resources other than grant-making and assess the strength of the current environment
needed to advance the S/SRGIA's Secretary capacity building agenda for state and local
leaders; participate in QDDR process regarding this agenda;
• Develop an agenda for a high-level retreat on the formulation of a National Capacity
Development Strategy to present achievements to date, lessons learned and proposals for
institutional capacity development going forward;
• Work with the Chiefs of Missions and other diplomats in countries where capacity
building is critical to the success of our diplomacy and development efforts;
4
Sensitive But Unclassified
• Amplify and sustain high quality and results driven support to institutional capacity
development by assisting in advocating for increased funding and building public-private
partnerships;
• Prioritize discrete initiatives to ""fast track"", based on importance, regional priorities (e.g.,
Asia, Africa and Latin America), assessment of readiness, impact and feasibility and
translate priorities into actionable interventions;
• Develop a network of experts involved in existing capacity-building initiatives related to
global intergovernmental affairs and build partnerships;
• Define a coordinated approach and institutional responsibilities for supporting the GIA
capacity building initiative; and
• Identify opportunities for further collaboration with state and local officials on their
projects and Department priorities.
IV. Administrative Activities
• Standardize requests for assistance with projects related to policy, business, trade,
consular affairs, etc.; and
• Link the Department website to states websites and trade and development office
websites.
V. Budget and Staffing
S/SRGIA will require a budget and staffing to fulfill its mission.
VI. Assessment of Progress
The short term goal will be to engage U.S. intergovernmental officials about their global
concerns. The S/SRGIA office will become a significant resource for high-level State
Department engagement for U.S. state and local elected officials. The benefits of this new office
will be immediate and grow over time as our engagement deepens. Assisting US states and local
governments to expand their exports, promote locations for foreign investment and for
participation in State Department priorities are some of the short term benefits we hope to
achieve with respect to U.S. intergovernmental officials.
With respect to the global intergovernmental officials, in the short term, we expect to
work with our Regional Bureaus and Offices, (e.g., USAID, ECA, EEB, etc.) to assess the
current state of play and assist us with how we better target and leverage our assistance to this
constituency.
In the longer term, institutionally, we need to sustain relationships with our embassies
and missions overseas, so that they can assist state and local officials and their constituencies to
expand their global business base. As related to our national capacity building strategy, in the
long term, we seek to empower and educate and build relationships with state and local officials
abroad. We also seek accountability for the outcomes of the programming and will provide
leadership for future investments. Going forward, we will tailor these investments to address
regional State Department priorities.
5
Sensitive But Unclassified
In addition, since there is a lack of USG harmonization of all of the relevant USG
programs, having S/SRGIA be the designated coordinator will allow DOS to take the lead in
synchronizing government wide programs that engage foreign government officials. This will be
another long term goal for the office.
VII. Potential Events
A. Potential Events and Activities for S
1. Private Dinner or Luncheon with the Governors and Urban Mayors;
2. Roundtable or Speech at USCMNGA Winter Meetings; and
3. Recommendations of Governors and Mayors for S to extend possible invitations for
occasional international travel with S.
B. Potential Events and Activities SRGIA
1. Host ""Day with State"" with U.S. intergovernmental officials and conduct joint meetings
with various State Department Bureaus and Offices giving stakeholders the ability to
connect and partner with State;
2. Focus Groups with Diplomats from key regions of interest representing Latin America,
Africa, Asia in our development of our capacity building strategy;
3. Meetings with other elected officials and representative organizations;
4. Meetings with NG0s, thinktanks, etc.; and
5. Recommend US intergovernmental officials for appointments to US delegations to State
Department international meetings and conferences.
VIII. Possible Travel for SRGIA
A. Domestic
1. TX, NY, VA, MD, PA, Delaware, D.C. Illinois, Florida, California, Ohio, NJ, Michigan.
States are targeted based on foreign direct investment, export data and states of interest.
B. International
1. Travel to targeted international meetings that focus on engaging state and local leaders;
(e.g. World Urban Forum, Brazil; World Cities Summit 2010, Singapore; World Alliance
of Cities Against Poverty, Rotterdam; 3' Meeting of United Cities and Local
Governments-ASPAC Congress 2010, Japan; Global Mayors Forum, Hong Kong and
Shenzhen, China;
2. Emphasis and travel to Asia, Latin America and Africa countries where capacity building
is critical to the success of our diplomacy and development effort.
6
Sensitive But Unclassified
IX. Key Dates - 2010
1. Jan, 13 - 14, 2010, Western Hemisphere Economic Officers Conference, Puerto Rico
2. Jan. 20— Jan. 22, USCM Winter Meeting and June 2010 Annual Meeting
3. Jan. 29 — Feb. 1, National Association of Secretaries of State
4. Jan. 30 — Jan. 31, National Conference of State Legislatures, Savannah, GA
5. Feb. 8 — Feb. 10, National Association of Attorneys General, Ft. Lauderdale, FL
6. Feb. 20 — Feb. 22, National Governors Association Winter Meeting and July 2010
Annual Meeting
7. Mar. 6 — Mar. 7, National Association of Counties
8. Mar. 10 — Mar. 12, National Lieutenant Governors Association
9. International Conference of Mayors Summits
10.Strategic and Economic Dialogue — Chaired by S and Treasury
11.2010 - Gov. Linda Lingle, APEC Conference — Hawaii
12.World Conference of Mayors for Peace
13.United Nations Day
14.Mayors Hemisphere Forum
7"
3469,Thanks. I passed on to Ron as well and clarified it was to do with W Sahara.
3470,See below. Todd also wrote a short while ago to say the following:
3471,"Whoops. ..to say:
HRC should come. Danes expect all day Thursday for discussions with and among leaders to resolve open issues.
Discussed this with Danish leaders today. Think this very important. This is looking more and more difficult, so I'm
certainly not promising success. But bad if we don't try full out. Thanks pal."
3472,Readouts from all your calls r going to the relevant people.
3473,"Per the plan, a statement is being released in your name. This is the same statement you saw in the memo package
from Mitchell:
Today's announcement by the Government of Israel helps move forward toward resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We believe that through good-faith negotiations the parties can mutually agree on an outcome which ends the
conflict and reconciles the Palestinian goal of an independent and viable state based on the 1967 lines, with agreed
swaps, and the Israeli goal of a Jewish state with secure and recognized borders that reflect subsequent developments
and meet Israeli security requirements. Let me say to all the people of the region and world: our commitment to
achieving a solution with two states living side by side in peace and security is unwavering."
3474,"I just talked to the French NEA equivalent.
Jeffrey Feltman"
3476,"Madam Secretary: We are in total agreement with the French on this issue, are coordinating closely and being proactive
in our own diplomacy.
Johnnie"
3477,"I've asked Todd to identify the specific areas where he thinks progress can be made through discussions on Thursday.
At a high level, I think leaders' conversations on Thursday will begin to narrow gaps on the big issues -- transparency,
funding, inscribing commitments, etc -- IF (and it's a big if) those gaps are narrow-able. If they're not, then
Thursday/Friday will be days of trying and failing ... but at least trying.
Todd's view is that there is not enough time Friday for top-level meetings to close the deal; that two days are required.
You would be our head of delegation for the first, POTUS for the second."
3478,"Will get back to you on the specific process, but my understanding is that it will be a series of bilats and possibly some
working sessions. You can meet with leaders; harder for Todd or Chu to do so."
3479,"Netanyahu gave a press conference a few hours ago. I've seen plenty of his quotes in stories. Let me see if I can find
transcript."
3480,Will do.
3481,"Will do. Below is the formal statement that was released in the PM's name:
Today, my cabinet authorized a policy of restraint regarding settlements which will include a suspension of new permits
and new construction in Judea and Samaria for a period of ten months.
My cabinet authorized this far reaching step because of our deep desire for peace.
We hope that this decision will help launch meaningful peace negotiations to reach a historic peace agreement that will
finally end the conflict between the Palestinians and Israel.
We are committed to working closely with the United States to advance peace and security in the region.
We have been told by many friends that once Israel takes the first step towards peace, the Palestinians and the Arab
world would respond positively with steps of their own to create a virtuous cycle of goodwill.
Well, the government of Israel is taking a very big and difficult step toward peace today.
I hope that the Palestinians and the Arab world will seize this opportunity to work with us to forge a new beginning and
a new future for our children and for their children.
Since the day our government was sworn in eight months ago, we have been calling for direct negotiations with the
Palestinians.
During that time, we have taken many concrete actions to improve daily life for the Palestinians and to create a climate
in which political negotiations would have the best chance to succeed.
We have dismantled hundreds of roadblocks and checkpoints, extended the hours of operation on the Allenby Bridge
and removed bureaucratic obstacles to Palestinian economic development.
These actions have helped spur a surge, a boom, in the Palestinian economy. At the same time, the security
environment has improved thanks both to the efforts of the IDF and to the efforts of better trained PA security forces.
Now we wish to add to this improved economic and security climate meaningful political negotiations.
I have already said that we will not build new settlements and that we would not expropriate additional land for existing
settlements.
I said we would also restrain settlement activity, and that's exactly what we decided to do today.
I promised to enable normal life to continue for the three hundred thousand Israeli citizens, our brothers and sisters,
who live in Judea and Samaria.
That is why this suspension will not affect construction currently underway.
It will not include the schools, kindergartens, synagogues and public buildings necessary for the continuation of normal
life over the time period of the suspension.
Obviously, any infrastructure that may be needed to protect our national security or to safeguard the lives of our citizens
will also be provided during this time.
Regarding Jerusalem, our sovereign capital, our position is well known. We do not put any restrictions on building in our
sovereign capital.
As always, we are committed to protect freedom of worship for all faiths and to ensure equal and fair treatment for all
the city's residents, Jews and Arabs alike.
When the suspension ends, my government will revert to the policies of previous governments in relation to
construction.
I want to say clearly to the Palestinians: Now is the time to begin negotiations. Now is the time to move the peace
process forward. There is no more time to waste.
Israel has taken a far reaching step for peace. It's time for the Palestinians to do the same."
3482,"Daniel R is going to get it to him, along with your statement, highlighting what you've said about 1967."
3483,I am meeting with Raj but should be done by llam - can you talk then?
3484,"List we are reaching out to:
Saudi
Italy
Poland
Romania
Spain
France
Netherlands
Australia
Canada
Norway
Denmark
Sweden
Japan
South Korea"
3486,"I think Jake should be on the call.
Once the call is scheduled, I will get a version to you before the call that reflects the latest revisions I've
received.
Dan
On Sun, Dec 13, 2009 at 7:56 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemai1.com> wrote:
The latest draft is getting closer. And I agree w Dan that we have to be careful not to topple the tree w too
many ornaments. That said, I'd like to have a call w you (and anyone else who you think should be on) this
afternoon or evening to raise a few points. I'm copying Lona and Huma so they can help schedule it. Thanks
for all your good work."
3487,"Answers under each:
Will I receive a full notebook for approps hearings tonight?
Yes, and a draft of the testimony.
I'd like a call this afternoon or evening to go over the draft Af-Pak regional strategy. Who should be on call? It is quite
good but lacks ""milestones"" and budgets for each section.
Sounds good. Huma and I will work to set it up. The budget issue is complicated we've had several discussions about
it. It's hard to put down numbers with confidence.
Call should be with Jack, Piper, Rich, Paul Jones, and Sean Misko.
Re the required report for Kerry-Lugar, I want to be sure that the language in both our report and this one echo the
same language.
Paul, Sean, and Rich are going back over to make sure of that. Our chief method is to use framing language from the
strategy to frame the KLB report as well.
I never called Patricia Espinosa—should I?
Will check with WHA.
Also, have we rec'd a memo from Shaun Woodard for Robinson and McGuinness calls?
Huma should have this memo for you.
There will also be a PC on Af-Pak Tuesday and I want to be sure our report is ready.
Yes -- this is consistent with our timeline."
3488,I've flagged again for Jack and team. We'll work on it.
3489,"Hrc miliband called asking to talk today about climate change/copenhagen. Said he was calling many of his counterparts
today. Below are points. Oscar also has and can print. Ops can connect.
The Secretary's Call with British FM David Miliband
Climate Change Points:
COP15 Negotiation Update:"
3490,"Either works for me-- I am working through various sets of line edits right now. I can get a new draft out by
4pm-- depends on how much time you want to review before we talk.
Dan
On Sun, Dec 13, 2009 at 2:20 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Could we do at 4:30 or 6:45?"
3491,"The Obama party is called for 7:00pm too. I will find out if that means cocktails first and then sitting down to dinner,
which may mean you could do a quick drop by Tamera's on the front end."
3492,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, December 13, 2009 3:16 PM
Syrian presidents brother
You ok with this condolence cable for syrian president assad? He brother died after a long illness.
Dear Mr. President:
Sincerely yours,"
3493,"Yes - am forgetting now but a few things - will connect - nothing urgent (I think - damn I am getting old)
B6"
3494,"Yes taking shuttle with you
Was going to take train to usss party but with weather and luggage, will just meet u at Iga. All shuttles delayed 30
minutes."
3495,Can we do a 7pm speech call?
3496,"Bob, Jose, and in particular John Byerly in EEB. He did the heavy lifting on this. I'll check on who else might need a
shoutout."
3497,"Yes, all emails on this came from john byerly."
3498,Also -- Arturo and Craig say hold on Espinosa for now.
3499,"This draft, for the 7pm call, reflects HRC edits.
Dan
Daniel Baer
202-687-1403 (o)"
3501,Also -- Arturo and Craig say hold on Espinosa for now.
3502,"Call sheets will be coming on secure fax at 8am.
Here are confirmed calls:
830: Japanese FMinister Okada
845: French FMinister Kouchner
900: Polish FMinister Sikorski
915: Canadian FMinister Cannon
930: Brazilian FMinister Amorim
945: Romanian President Basescu
1000: Norwegian FM Stoere
1015: Italian FM Frattini
1030: Possible Saudi FM
1045: Dutch FMinister Verhagen
1100: Spanish FMinister Moratinos"
3504,We have given them windowns. As soon as you are done the next one will be connected.
3505,"sbwhoeor
Thursday, November 26, 2009 10:24 AM
H
New memo. Decline and fall, etc. Cheers, Sid
hrc memo western alliance 112609.docx
November 26.2009
For: Hillary"
3506,"I agree with Dan about the ornament problem. The draft needs refinement not re-working. And a call is a great idea. I
am just getting off a plane but could be available any time after 4 pm or so if that works for you."
3507,"Muscatine, Lissa <MuscatineL@state.gov>
Sunday, December 13, 2009 2:49 PM
daniel.baer
Valmoro, Lona J; Huma Abedin
Re: Speech
Either time works for me."
3508,"sbwhoeop
Thursday, November 26, 2009 10:58 AM
H
Re: New memo. Decline and fall, etc. Cheers, Sid
Have a good holiday. Very best to Bill. Talk soon."
3509,Ok. Yes ray lahood is still on.
3510,"Amazing job on the calls!
U r done after this minus romania which we won't pursue any more Saudi might be available at 12:45 and if u r ok, we
can do it then."
3511,"spring? He's going to be devastated.
I just came from Georgetown and talked to Jack et al. applied for ""early action"" —that is to be
guaranteed admittance without applying elsewhere. The decision on ""early action"" is based on grades and scores — the
most empirical measures. It is EXTREMELY difficult to be accepted EARLY at Georgetown She was deferred until the
spring — through the regular process when they will weigh all her strengths. There is never any guarantee but this is the
situation for early action.
Everyone is excited about the speech tom'w. I wish I could go but have to be here for another event at State. I've gone
back and forth with speechwriters. I know it will be terrific.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
3512,"I will fax a copy of this version to the house momentarily.
Comments / suggestions are in brackets as you requested.
FYI, a non-annotated version sent to D(S) and D(L), Burns, as well as to folks at NSC who had weighed in.
I will be back in office by 730.
Dan"
3514,Did u take your earpiece or do I need to get it?
3516,fyi
3519,fyi
3520,"See the story below. Consensus recommendation is that you call PR and MM tomorrow or Wednesday. Because we
expect them both to go to the press after they speak with you, we believe it would be best for you to keep the calls at a
very high level. Essentially:
O Two months have passed since your trip to Belfast and you're checking in;
• You're concerned about the news reports;
O You understand that there are substantive differences and frayed nerves, but you want to encourage all parties
to take positive actions and avoid unhelpful ones;
• You remain prepared to assist in any way — you are personally invested in seeing them work through to the
completion of this process;
• Declan is hard at work, but his efforts are hampered by the lack of progress and the public conflict
You would be mostly in listening mode and wouldn't engage substantively on the issues that are dividing them — parades
(Sinn Fein doesn't want to concede anything on parades without a date for devolution) and a date (DUP doesn't want to
set a date until they get progress on parades).
If you're amenable, we-can move forward and schedule the calls.
Thanks,
Jake"
3521,FYI
3522,FYI
3523,fyi
3524,"John Murtha Hospitalized:
David Rogers December 14, 2009 12:03 PM EST
With the annual Pentagon budget bill due on the House floor this week, a familiar face may be missing.Rep. John
Murtha, chairman of the House Appropriations defense panel, was hospitalized Sunday night because of abdominal
pains. The 77-year-old Pennsylvania Democrat had been feeling ill with what he thought last week was swine flu but the
hospitalization appears related to his gall bladder.""He's currently resting and doing well,"" his office said. But a major
committee hearing Murtha had planned for Tuesday on the growing U.S. military commitment in Afghanistan has been
postponed"
3525,"9:15 am MEETING w/liELGIAN FOREIGN MINISTER LETERME
9:45 am Room 34H
10:00 am
11:00 am
HAITI KEY PLAYERS MEETING
Jade Room
11:05 am DEPART Waldorf-Astoria Hotel *En route Canadian Mission
11:15 am ARRIVE Canadian Mission
11:20 am
11:30 am
11:30 am
12:00 pm
PULL-ASIDE w/SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SECRETARY-
GENERAL KM EIDE 14th Floor
FRIENDS OF AFGHANISTAN MEETING
14th Floor
12:05 pm DEPART Canadian Mission *En route Waldorf-Astoria Hotel
12:15 pm ARRIVE Waldorf-Astoria Hotel
12:20 pm
12:40 pm
PERSONAL/STAFF TIME
Private Suite
12:45 pm DEPART Waldorf-Astoria Hotel *En route Sheraton Hotel and Towers
12:55 pm ARRIVE Sheraton Hotel and Towers
1:00 pm CLINTON GLOBAL INITIATIVE CLOSING PLENARY
3:00 pm Main Ballroom
3:05 pm DEPART Sheraton Hotel and Towers *En route Waldorf-Astoria
3:15 pm ARRIVE Waldorf-Astoria Hotel
3:20 pm TAPING OF ""FACE THE NATION"" INTERVIEW w/HARRY SMITH
3:40 pm 34th Floor
3:45 pm MEETING w/CARIBBEAN FOREIGN MINISTERS
4:45 pm Jade Room
4:50 pm PRE-BRIEF MEETING
4:55 pm Outside of Room 35H
5:00 pm MEETING w/INDIAN EXTERNAL AFFAIRS MINISTER KRISHNA
5:25 pm Room 35H
5:30 pm MEETING w/AZERBAIJANI FOREIGN MINISTER MAMMADYAROV
6:00 pm Room 35H
6:05 pm DEPART Waldorf-Astoria Hotel *En route Ritz-Carlton Hotel
6:25 pm ARRIVERitz-Carlton Hotel
6:30 pm MEETING wIIRAQI PRESIDENT TALABANI
7:30 pm Meeting Room Tbd
7:35 pm DEPARTRitz-Carlton Hotel
En route Waldorf-Astoria Hotel
###"
3527,fyi
3528,FYI
3529,FYI
3531,Why not! Will call him.
3532,Sorry which building was that? The hotel?
3533,Got it.
3534,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, September 26, 2009 9:27 PM
H
Fw: Funeral--oct 6 Texas
Fyi"
3535,"Yes, I can send within the hour."
3537,"But it was great to see Bill on such good form.
My friend from Q really enjoyed your meeting and felt it had gone we'll hope you did too Sent from my HTC Touch Pro
This message has been scanned by MailController - www.MailController.altohiway.com"
3539,Will get u full update. B6
3540,"Below is the update as of last night. But I'm trying to see what else we can do to help expedite. I talked to last
night and she said I . was in touch with 2 state department staff yesterday and was grateful for their assistance and
for constantly staying in touch.
Getting u an update from today but as of last night:
There has been very close coordination among Consular Affairs, Embassy Kathmandu
and Consulate Chengdu.
I"
3541,"Yes, I saw that. Trying to get some more info now."
3542,"Politico
Poll: Clinton approval soars
By: Eamon Javers
December 16, 2009 03:00 PM EST
A new poll of avid news watchers shows that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has a much higher
approval rating than the man she once campaigned against and now works for, President Barack
Obama.
In the poll of 800 registered voters who are self-identified ""news watchers,"" Clinton had a 75 percent
approval rating and a 21 percent disapproval rating overall. Obama, in contrast, had a 51 percent
approval and a 45 percent disapproval rating.
The Secretary of State has conducted several well-received foreign trips in recent months and has
not been as closely identified with the more contentious elements of the Administration's agenda,
including the health care fight, the federal deficit and the Wall Street bailouts. And she has not been
subjected to nearly the same media and partisan scrutiny as the president. Obama, meanwhile, has
been on national television on a daily basis tackling a wide range of difficult issues.
The poll was conducted by the nonpartisan Clarus Research Group from December 7th to the 12th,
and it asked for opinions of the top Cabinet secretaries and White House officials. Its finding on
Obama and Clinton mirrors that of earlier polls — in October, for example, a Gallup poll found that
Clinton had become more popular than the president.
Clarus president Ron Faucheux said one reason for Clinton's high poll numbers is her high approval
among Republicans — numbers he said position her well to run for president again in the future, if she
chooses. Clinton had 96 percent approval among Democrats, a healthy 57 percent approval among
Republicans, and 65 percent approval among Independents. Obama was nearly as popular among
Democrats — 93 percent — but his numbers among Republicans and Independents fell off
dramatically, at 19 percent and 33 percent respectively.
Clinton's Republican numbers are striking, given how intensely disliked she has been in the past
among GOP voters. In fact, part of Obama's appeal to Democratic primary voters in 2008 was that he
was more likely to be able to bridge the partisan divide than Clinton, who was by then a well-known
figure dating to her time as first lady in the 1990s.
""Republicans may see her as being more hawkish than other Democrats on foreign policy issues,""
said Faucheux. ""It may be a way for them to bolster that position within the administration."" Asked
about any future Clinton presidential bid, he said, ""She's in good shape now.""
The next highest-rated cabinet secretary in the survey was Defense Secretary Robert Gates, who
notched a 69 percent overall approval rate with a 78 percent approval among Democrats and 63
percent among both Republicans and independents.
""Both Clinton and Gates did well across the partisan board,"" said Faucheux. ""Everybody else did well
among Democrats but fell off among Republicans.""
Another trend spotted by the pollsters: Approval ratings inside the Beltway were higher than in the
rest of the country. ""These results show that the 'Beltway echo chamber' does not reflect the rest of
the country, even among news watchers,"" said Faucheux.
Among White House staffers and advisors, Press Secretary Robert Gibbs — who is often seen on
television — had the highest overall rating at 50 percent. Economic advisor Larry Summers had the
lowest approval, at 25 percent.
Summers and Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner — who are both closely associated with the
economy — both posted higher disapproval numbers than approval. Summers' disapproval rating was
41 percent. Geithner's disapproval rating was 45 percent, one point higher than his approval rating.
The poll also found that White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel, who is often viewed as having
sharp partisan elbows, scored much higher among Democrats, at 72 percent, than Republicans, at 13
percent.
Among other major administration officials, Vice President Joe Biden had a 50 percent approval and
41 percent disapproval rating; Attorney General Eric Holder and HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius
both posted 41 percent approval and 35 percent disapproval; Presidential Adviser David Axelrod
scored 38 percent approval and 36 percent disapproval; and National Security Adviser James Jones
had a 30 percent approval and 23 percent disapproval rating.
Nora Toiv
Office of the Secretary
202-647-8633"
3543,"sbwhoeop
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 5:48 PM
H: In case you haven't seen, but don't give yourself a grade if asked. Sid
Poll: Clinton approval
soars
By: Eamon „lavers
December 16, 2009 03:00
PM EST
A new poll of avid news watchers
shows that Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton has a much higher
approval rating than the man she
once campaigned against and now
works for, President Barack
Obama.
In the poll of 800 registered voters
who are self-identified ""news
watchers,"" Clinton had a 75 percent
approval rating and a 21 percent
disapproval rating overall. Obama,
in contrast, had a 51 percent
approval and a 45 percent
disapproval rating.
The Secretary of State has
conducted several well-received
foreign trips in recent months and
has not been as closely identified
with the more contentious elements
of the Administration's agenda,
including the health care fight, the
federal deficit and the Wall Street
bailouts. And she has not been
subjected to nearly the same media
and partisan scrutiny as the
president. Obama, meanwhile, has
been on national television on a _
daily basis tackling a wide range of
difficult issues.
The poll was conducted by the
nonpartisan Clarus Research
Group from December 7th to the
12th, and it asked for opinions of
the top Cabinet secretaries and
White House officials. Its finding on
Obama and Clinton mirrors that of
earlier polls — in October, for
example, a Gallup poll found that
Clinton had become more popular
than the president.
Clarus president Ron Faucheux
said one reason for Clinton's high
poll numbers is her high approval
among Republicans — numbers he
said position her well to run for
president again in the future, if she
chooses. Clinton had 96 percent
approval among Democrats, a
healthy 57 percent approval among
Republicans, and 65 percent
approval among Independents.
Obama was nearly as popular
among Democrats — 93 percent —
but his numbers among
Republicans and Independents fell
off dramatically, at 19 percent and
33 percent respectively.
Clinton's Republican numbers are
striking, given how intensely
disliked she has been in the past
among GOP voters. In fact, part of
Obama's appeal to Democratic
primary voters in 2008 was that he
was more likely to be able to bridge
the partisan divide than Clinton,
who was by then a well-known
figure dating to her time as first lady
in the 1990s.
""Republicans may see her as being
more hawkish than other
Democrats on foreign policy
issues,"" said Faucheux. ""It may be
a way for them to bolster that
position within the administration.""
Asked about any future Clinton
presidential bid, he said, ""She's in
good shape now.""
The next highest-rated cabinet
secretary in the survey was
Defense Secretary Robert Gates,
who notched a 69 percent overall
approval rate with a 78 percent
approval among Democrats and 63
percent among both Republicans
and independents.
""Both Clinton and Gates did well
across the partisan board,"" said
Faucheux. ""Everybody else did well
among Democrats but fell off
among Republicans.""
Another trend spotted by the
pollsters: Approval ratings inside
the Beltway were higher than in the
rest of the country. ""These results
show that the 'Beltway echo
chamber' does not reflect the rest of
the country, even among news
watchers,"" said Faucheux.
Among White House staffers and
advisors, Press Secretary Robert
Gibbs — who is often seen on
television — had the highest overall
rating at 50 percent. Economic
advisor Larry Summers had the
lowest approval, at 25 percent.
Summers and Treasury Secretary
Timothy Geithner — who are both
closely associated with the
economy — both posted higher
disapproval numbers than approval.
Summers' disapproval rating was
41 percent. Geithner's disapproval
rating was 45 percent, one point
higher than his approval rating.
The poll also found that White
House Chief of Staff Rahm
Emanuel, who is often viewed as
having sharp partisan elbows,
scored much higher among
Democrats, at 72 percent, than
Republicans, at 13 percent.
Among other major administration
officials, Vice President Joe Biden
had a 50 percent approval and 41
percent disapproval rating; Attorney
General Eric Holder and HHS
Secretary Kathleen Sebelius both
posted 41 percent approval and 35
percent disapproval; Presidential
Adviser David Axelrod scored 38
percent approval and 36 percent
disapproval; and National Security
Adviser James Jones had a 30
percent approval and 23 percent
disapproval rating.
El-
© 2009 Capitol News
Company, LLC"
3544,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 27, 2009 1:31 PM
H
Latest on
It is a national holiday in Nepal now, and Embassy Kathmandu is closed on Monday
and Tuesday, but they will clearly come in to help expedite the transportation of the remains back to the U.S. Post has
already alerted those involved with preparing remains to be on stand by.
We will reiterate to everyone involved the need to do everything possible to expedite the return of the remains to the
U.S., and to inform us of any obstacles. Thus far, we have not heard of any."
3546,"Lisa is coming at 7:15 tomorrow.
Will you come to nyc in time for first bilat?"
3547,"Yes at 10.
Was checking to see if I needed to make arrangements for you to do anything earlier."
3548,"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR©state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 9:48 PM
Fw: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
Hold on Tom was lifted. Thanks for making the calls. Trying to get him thru as quickly as possible before another hold
emerges."
3549,"Let me check in.
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 27, 2009 6:50 PM
H
Re: Checking in"
3550,"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 10:06 PM
Re: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
Yes, I sold my soul to George Lemieux today. I am not proud of it."
3551,"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 10:27 PM
Re: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
I suspect they would prefer more $ for Little Havana."
3553,"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 10:48 PM
Re: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
They are out for the night. No one, in any department, has been confirmed in a couple of weeks. The environment is
toxic right now. Lula Davis sueeests all our noms (about 18 of theml will an on one of the !act davc they are in caccinn
which could be next week.
Will continue pressing tomorrow. Have even
sought help from McConnell's staff and Dave Schiappa from the R floor staff. They are trying to be helpful."
3554,"I didn't - but hard to believe he did. I was pretty surprised myself when I read the piece.
Just shows you that it's near impossible to take issue with the job you're doing it, which is why the political reporters
have to resort to the manufactured drama of interactions with the WH.
Face was good. Perfect in that it generated no issues to clean up, but other networks picked up clips re Iran.
Gates's remark that he couldn't send any new troops before January to Afghanistan seems to be the only thing
approaching news.
I saw WJC on Meet (VERY good, and a lot about CGI's work re women and girls), but I missed Paterson!"
3555,"Nice feed back on Capricia's Diplomatic Women's Corp lunch with 160 women from around government (WH, agencies,
Hill) and women ambassadors from other countries."
3556,"Sorry -- meant to send earlier:
China sees no chance of climate deal - source
Thu Dec 17, 2009
Print I Single Page
By Krittivas Mukherjee and Pete Harrison
COPENHAGEN (Reuters) - China has told participants in the U.N. climate change talks that it sees no possibility of
achieving an operational accord this week, an official involved in the Copenhagen talks said on Thursday.
Dozens of heads of state are descending on the Danish capital to address the December 7-18 conference, and had hoped
to sign on Friday a new pact to tackle global warming.
The official, who asked not to be identified, told Reuters the Chinese had instead suggested issuing ""a short political
declaration of some sort,"" but it was not clear what that would say.
The official said negotiations were continuing to try to reach a breakthrough that would still allow an operational
agreement to be signed. The official said the sticking point for China appeared to be a process issue.
U.S. President Barack Obama has called for an ""operational accord"" -- essentially a political agreement with teeth that
can get countries working to cut or curb their greenhouse gas emissions while a more formal and binding treaty is
hammered out in 2010.
Some ministers warned that slow, often stalled talks during the summit meant it was staring at failure.
""We may not get there on the substance, it is quite possible we'll fail on the substance, but at least let's give it a try,""
said Britain's energy and climate minister Ed Miliband.
""At the moment the problem is we're not giving it a try.""
Developed and developing nations are at odds over who should cut emissions, how deep the cuts should be, and how
much funding should be provided to poor countries to help them shift to greener growth and adapt to a warmer world.
While the overall picture is bleak, there has been some progress in areas critical to reaching a deal.
Africa dramatically scaled back its expectations for climate aid from rich nations, and Japan pledged about $11 billion
(6.8 billion pound) in public funds to 2012 to help poor countries adapt to a warmer world and cut their emissions.
Talks on a U.N.-backed system to pay poorer nations to curb deforestation have advanced, and the United States
pledged $1 billion in short-term funds to conserve tropical forests.
A major sticking point between the world's top emitters, the United States and China, has been the question of how
they will prove they are sticking to emission-curbing plans.
On Tuesday, China's climate change ambassador warned developed countries against using climate change as an excuse
to set up trade barriers. Yu Qingtai said rich nations should not think that slapping carbon tariffs on imports from
countries with different emissions control regimes would substitute for reaching a global deal to tackle warming."
3557,"Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Thursday, December 17, 2009 5:39 AM
H
Abedin, Huma
Valmoro"
3558,More on capricia's lunch yesterday with women from government and women ambassadors from the diplomatic corp
3562,On it.
3563,"Arturo made a comment publicly about the fact that he had heard from US business interests that the judicial system in
Argentina had deteriorated.
Argentine press pounced — this is apparently a sensitive issue.
Craig is sending me news summaries."
3564,"Here is the news summary:
A/S Valenzuela's Trip to South America: Valenzuela in Argentina Chile's El Mercurio reports that the visit of A/S
Valenzuela resulted last night in another misunderstanding between Washington and Buenos Aires because of
statements by the US official regarding the management of the Argentine economy. Controversy arose over statement
by Valenzuela during a restricted meeting with the local press in which he echoes the concerns of American
businessmen in that country regarding ""judicial insecurity"" and the management of the economy. Valenzuela, also
indicated that has been noted ""change"" in the investment climate for US businesses and reminded those present that
""in 1996 there was a great deal of enthusiasm regarding investment"" in Argentina. The Argentine Foreign Ministry
responded in a communiqué that the government ""has not received complaints from US business with interests and
investments in the country."" Interior Minister Florencia Randazzo lamented that ""some officials revert to old practices""
when there is the expectation of a new period in US foreign policy."" Argentina's Clarin carries the same story titled
""Official Anger with Obama's Envoy Because He Spoke about Judicial Insecurity"" with the Interior Minister's riposte
""Argentina is living in a period of complete judicial and institutional guarantees"" and the nation ""has left behind the
period in which an official of another country can tell ours what guarantees should exist to benefit its own
interests."" INFOBAE.com adds that Minister of Justice Julio Alak described Valenzuela's statements as ""unprecedented
and unjustified."""
3565,"Well, there's something."
3566,See first point on israel. Lieberman put a call into you early this am. Suspect it was about this.
3567,FYI
3568,Did the call do any good?
3569,Looks like isn't back in ny yet.
3571,"Huma Abedin <
Sunday, December 20, 2009 9:35 AM
'ValmoroU@state.gov'
Flights
Mario suggests we check in with him in the afternoon about 8pm flight. Basically he said flight may get canceled at last
minute as has happened with shuttles this morning. He will check with crew who will give him best assesment."
3572,"Jake, Want to make sure you saw the front page story below. It's really about the tragedy of brothers wrongfully detained at
Guantanamo but it makes clear that Palau is doing the U.S. a great service and has been more courageous in this regard than most of
the world (although Palau is in many ways more vulnerable to China): The Secretary complimenting Pres. Toribiong re this was a good
move right after Alcy upset the Palauans (as you feared) in a meeting I will give you a confidential report on separately. Jeff
2 Brothers' Grim Tale Of Loyalty And Limbo
To Leave Guantanamo Means Abandoning Family
By Del Quentin Wilber
Washington Post Staff Writer
Monday, September 28, 2009
Bahtiyar Mahnut, a detainee at the U.S. military prison at Guantanamo Bay, learned a few weeks ago that the
Pacific island nation of Palau had invited him to settle there.
It should have been cause for celebration, especially for a man who desperately wants to be free. But, to the
surprise of his attorneys, Bahtiyar has turned down the offer. He wishes to remain a prisoner, they say, so he can
look after his older brother, a fellow detainee.
The brothers' saga, as related by their attorneys and military records, could transpire only in the context of
Guantanamo Bay and comes at a critical juncture for the Obama administration, which is struggling to meet a
Jan. 22 deadline to shutter the 223-detainee prison. Their circumstances also highlight the diplomatic difficulties
facing the U.S. government as it tries to find places to send prisoners not destined for terrorism trials in the
United States.
The brothers are Uighurs, residents of China who are considered separatists by Beijing but are not enemies of
the United States. The brothers were picked up separately in Afghanistan and Pakistan soon after the United
States launched attacks against al-Qaeda and the Taliban in retaliation for the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
Since at least 2003, the U.S. government has tried to find homes for the brothers and 20 other captured Uighurs.
Five went to Albania in 2006; four were sent to Bermuda in June. At one point, U.S. officials were considering
the possibility of resettling Uighurs in the D.C. region, but that plan was scuttled under political pressure. Most
countries have been reluctant to accept Uighurs and risk angering China.
In recent weeks, however, Palau has agreed to accept 12 of the 13 remaining Uighurs, according to the Justice
Department.
The only detainee not invited by Palau was Bahtiyar's older brother, Arkin Mahmud, 45, who has developed
mental health problems that are apparently too serious to be treated in the sparsely populated country, said his
attorney, Elizabeth Gilson.
To make matters worse, according to Gilson and military records, Arkin is a prisoner only because he went
searching for Bahtiyar after the younger brother left their homeland eight years ago.
""This is just very difficult and sad,"" said Abubakkir Qasim, 40, a Uighur freed from Guantanamo Bay in 2006
who considers himself a friend of both brothers.
""Bahtiyar is turning away freedom for his brother,"" Qasim said through an interpreter. ""His brother is only there
because of Bahtiyar. I feel sorry for both of them.""
Five other Uighurs have declined the offer for a variety of reasons, according to one of their attorneys, Susan
Baker Manning. The Justice Department says the government thinks that six to eight Uighurs will go to Palau.
The earliest they could leave would be Thursday, the Justice Department says.
Officials at the Defense and State departments and the Palau Embassy in Washington either declined to
comment or did not return phone messages.
In 2001, Bahtiyar and Arkin, both Muslims, were living with their parents and a younger brother in a small
house in bustling Ghulja in Western China. Arkin is the father of two children, then 8 and 5. The brothers were
not particularly devout but felt oppressed by the government of Beijing, which does not allow worship and
ensures the best jobs go to ethnic Chinese. The brothers were forced to survive as menial tradesmen. Bahtiyar
sold clothes; Arkin repaired shoes.
Bahtiyar wanted to strike out on his own. So, with $700 in his pocket, he headed for Pakistan. But he quickly
ran out of money and couldn't find work. He was worried about being sent back to China until a friend told him
about a group of Uighurs in Afghanistan that wanted ""to fight against the Chinese government.""
""If I went,"" he told military officials, ""I didn't have to pay for food or anything. So I went to Afghanistan.""
There, he lived with 35 other Uighurs in a camp of dusty roads and shacks in the southern mountains. The group
built houses and a mosque. They trained with one automatic rifle and did some push-ups, pull-ups and other
calisthenics, records show.
Within a few weeks of arriving at the camp, Bahtiyar managed to call home. His mother was very worried and
told Arkin to find his brother. ""He left because he was a dutiful son,"" Gilson said.
After the Sept. 11 attacks, the U.S. military began bombing Afghanistan and destroyed Bahtiyar's camp,
sending the Uighurs into the mountains for shelter. Bahtiyar and others crossed into neighboring Pakistan,
where they were arrested and turned over to U.S. authorities.
Meanwhile, Arkin made his way to Afghanistan, where he was captured by the Northern Alliance and turned
over the United States. At a military prison in Kandahar, the brothers saw each other across the razor wire.
In 2002, the military brought the brothers and 20 other Uighurs to Guantanamo Bay. Authorities alleged at the
time that the men trained at military-style camps affiliated with the Taliban or al-Qaeda. The accusations later
dissolved upon close scrutiny by the courts.
Arkin and Bahtiyar were confined in separate cells and, for months, were not able to talk. A Uighur interpreter
working for the military, Rushan Abbas, persuaded the military in 2003 to allow the brothers to meet in an
interrogation room.
When they saw each other, they hugged and wept. ""It was just so emotional,"" Abbas said. ""These brothers from
across the world coming together in an interrogation room for the first time.""
In 2005, Arkin remained in solitary confinement. He had a record of disciplinary infractions and had been
disrespectful to the guards, records show.
Not for the first time, Bahtiyar took steps to help his brother. Living in a more relaxed part of the prison, he was
granted a request to be moved to Arkin's camp. ""I missed my brother so much,"" he told military officials.
By the next year, the brothers had been cleared for release by the military. The government did not present any
evidence to justify their detention in a federal lawsuit brought the Uighurs seeking their freedom. In October, a
judge ordered them freed into the United States, but that decision was overturned on appeal. The Uighurs are
awaiting word, expected this week, on whether the Supreme Court will hear the case.
Last year, the remaining Uighurs were moved to a fenced-in camp that includes an activities room, video games
and books. Through it all, Arkin and Bahtiyar have struggled to cope with being prisoners, perhaps for years to
come. ""I know I'll die in here,"" Arkin told Gilson not long ago. ""In China, at least I would have a trial and
sentence.""
Since taking their case in 2005, Gilson has met with Arkin dozens of times. But she had only spoken to Bahtiyar
by phone. He had refused to meet with her, frustrated by lawyers always talking about what he considered
fruitless legal victories.
Two weeks ago, he changed his mind. Bahtiyar felt that he owed her an explanation for refusing Palau's
generous offer. ""Every day here is an eternity,"" he told Gilson through an interpreter. ""But I have to look out for
my brother.""
Jeffrey L. Farrow"
3574,"8:45 am DEPART Private Residence *En mute Waldorf Astoria Hotel
9:45 am ARRIVE Waldorf Astoria Hotel
10:00 am MEETING w/AFGHAN FOREIGN MINISTER SPANTA Suite 34H
10:35 am PERSONAL/STAFF TIME
10:55 am Private Suite
11:00 am MEETING w/ARMENIAN FOREIGN MINISTER NALBANDIAN
11:30 am Suite 34H
11:35 am PERSONAL/STAFF TIME
11:55 am Suite 34H
12:00 pm MEETING w/TURKISH FOREIGN MINISTER DAVUTOGLU
1:00 pm Suite 34H
1:00 pm
1:10 pm
PERSONAL/STAFF TIME
Private Suite
1:15 pin MEETING w/CAMBODIAN DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/
1:45 pm FOREIGN MINISTER NAMHONG Suite 34H
1:45 pm
2:05 pin
PERSONAL/STAFF TIME
Private Suite
2:10 pin DEPART Waldorf Astoria Hotel *En route LaGuardia Airport
2:35 pm ARRIVE LaGuardia Airport
3:00 pin DEPART LaGuardia Airport via US Airways #2179 *En route Washington Nat'l Airport
4:15 pm ARRIVE Washington National Airport
4:25 pm DEPART Washington National Airport *En route State Department
4:40 pin ARRIVE State Department
4:45 pm OFFICE TIME
6:30 pm Secretary's Office
6:30 pm PRIVATE MEETING w/ BOB GATES (T)
7:00 pm Secretary's Office
7:05 pm DINNER FOR INCOMING NATO SECRETARY GENERAL
8:30 pin RASMUSSEN Monroe Room, 8th Floor
8:35 pm DEPART State Department *En route Private Residence
8:45 pm ARRIVE Private Residence •
###"
3576,"Cherie Blair <
Tuesday, September 29, 2009 10:18 AM
H
Huma Abedin
RE: Sorry to miss you
I would love to see you if you have a spare minute let me know. The disability project is going to be run out of the office
next door to the Cherie Blair Foundation for Women so hopefully there is a lot of scope for collaboration"
3577,"FYI below
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, September 28, 2009 10:27 AM
H
Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
FW: Friday Presentation on Urgent Threat - Bill Burns will not be at the Retreat"
3578,"Cc: H
Oscar, can you pis print this call sheet for hrc
Its for another call that will likely happen today
thanks"
3579,He indicated he will not be back until Friday night or Saturday am -- are you saying postpone the entire Retreat?
3580,"Attached and below is the proposed final Retreat Agenda.
The chief challenge I see is in having each bureau give 3 minutes on their top 3 priorities.
I think it is worthwhile from the standpoint that this is the first time all will be together with the chance to see/meet and
hear from everyone, but it will take time to hear from everyone. I've broken it up into 2 sections of an hour
each. Without these sections, the Retreat would breathe — with them it's tight though I have left padding in each
section.
I also am holding a place for up front for Susan Rice to present if she comes — she has not rsvped.
Please see below and attached and advise if there are other suggested changes.
Bill Burns cannot attend the retreat and currently will give his update on Iran to Jim; we also will have Jim address Iraq in
his overview too.
Cdm
Leadership Learning Retreat
Department of State
Blair House
October 2, 2009
Notional Timeline
8:00am:
8:30am:
8:35am:
Continental Breakfast
Overview and Strategic Objectives for Retreat [CDM]
Foreign Policy in the Obama Administration [HRC]
o Priorities
o Our Accomplishments To Date
8:50am The Next 6 Months
• On the Horizon (including Iraq/Iran) [Jim Steinberg] [10 min]
• The 2011 Budget Challenge [Jack Lew] [10 min]
• QDDR: Restoring Diplomacy/Elevating Dev [10 min]
o Presentation by Anne Marie Slaughter/Alonzo Fulgham
• USUN — The Future and Multilaterism [TBC]
9:25am: Ask the Secretary: Questions and Answers [30 minutes]
10:00am: Urgent Threats Panel
o Middle East — George Mitchell [7 min]
o Af/Pak — Richard Holbrooke [7 min]
o North Korea — Steve Bosworth [7 min]
o Q & A [20 min]
10:45am Coffee Break
11:00am Around the World, Department, and USAID Priorities
• Top 3 Priorities for Each Bureau/Dept — List Style
• 3 minutes each
• [USAID, USUN, SES(Gration), E, PM, ECA, IIP, PA, M, CA, DS, FSI, HR, G,
DRL, OES, PRM, G/TIP]
12:00: Lunch
• Lunch Presentation at 12:20pm
• Presenter: Alec Ross — 21' Century Statecraft [10 min]
1:00pm: Partnering for Success — Paradigms and Pitfalls
• Overview by Maria Otera
• Breakout into 4 Groups of 15 with facilitator and note-taker [40 min]
• Whole of State/USAID/MCC Approach — How Should this Occur
• Partnering and Leading Through the Interagency
• Regional and Functional Bureaus — How Can They Connect
• In-Country USG Coordination — What is the Paradigm?
2:00pm Presentation of Working Group Findings
• Presentation by Group Facilitator (or Other) of Lessons and Best Practices [5 min per
group]
o Whole of State/USAID/MCC
o Partnering and Leading Through the Interagency
o Regional and Functional Bureaus — Ensuring Connections
o In-Country USG Coordination — the Art of the Possible?
• Q/A to each group [25 min]
2:45pm Coffee Break
3:00pm Transnational Challenges:
• Non-Proliferation — Ellen Tauscher [5 min]
3:45pm:
• Climate Change — Todd Stern [5 min]
• Global Health — Dana/Gloria [5 min]
• Global Hunger & Food Security — Moore [5 min]
• Questions and Answers [20 min]
Around the World, Department, and USAID Priorities
• Top 3 Priorities for Each Bureau/Dept — List Style
• 3 Minute presentations
• [AF, EUR, EAP, NEA, SCA, WHA, IO INL, SR/PPP, SR/ME, INR, H, CPR,
OCR, CT, GAG,GWI, .IEC, CRS, WCI]
5:15pm: The Challenges on the Horizon [HRC]
• HRC expresses appreciation for work done today
• Outlines the Challenges Ahead
• Seeks Investment and Commits to Follow-Up
5:30pm Retreat Concludes"
3582,Will do.
3583,"Ok
Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.gov>
Friday, November 27, 2009 8:17 AM
H; Huma Abedin
Re: Call list"
3585,Will do.
3586,I will prepare these for you to sign today.
3587,"newmyer on behalf of Jackie Newmyer
Tuesday, September 29, 2009 11:20 AM
H
new Iran-China oil deal, reported in Iran (in English) and in China (in Chinese)
B6B6
Secretary Clinton,
Just wanted to make sure that you saw the news about one of China's oil conglomerates and the Iranian National Oil
Company over the
weekend:
Iran, China sign a major oilfield deal, Mon, 28 Sep 2009 15:05:09 GMT China National Petroleum Corp (CNPC) has signed
a contract with National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) for the development of Iran's South Azadegan oilfield. The Chinese
company will buy a 70 percent share of the whole project, according to an agreement signed Sunday in Lausanne,
Switzerland between CNPC and NIOC's overseas investment subsidiary, Naftiran Intertrade Company (NICO) that covers
a 90 percent stake in the project.
A likely explanation would be that this deal has been long in the making. Still, Tehran's motivation for releasing this
information in English at this time is worth considering.
The whole story from an English-language Iranian outlet is pasted in below, and I found three Chinese-language sources
with corroborating reports (nothing in English from China, though):
http://business.sohu.com/20090929/n267094148.shtml
http://money.163.com/09/0929/14/5KCSKN5F002524SO.html
http://finance.sina.com.cn/world/gjjj/20090929/18566807524.shtml
Jackie
Press TV
Iran, China sign a major oilfield deal
Mon, 28 Sep 2009 15:05:09 GMT
China National Petroleum Corp (CNPC) has signed a contract with National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) for the
development of Iran's South Azadegan oilfield.
The Chinese company will buy a 70 percent share of the whole project, according to an agreement signed Sunday in
Lausanne, Switzerland between CNPC and NIOC's overseas investment subsidiary, Naftiran lntertrade Company (NICO)
that covers a 90 percent stake in the project.
CNPC, which won a bid in January to develop the North Azadegan oilfield, now holds a 70 percent share of the project
with NICO holding 20 percent, and Inpex of Japan having the remaining 10 percent.
The South Azadegan project is slated to produce 260,000 barrels of crude oil per day, and its development will cost
around $2.5 billion.
The field, along the Iraqi border, holds reserves estimated at approximately 42 billion barrels of oil, one of the world's
largest finds in the last 30 years.
Iran provides 14 percent of China's demand for oil.
The deal is couched in buy-back terms, in which CNPC will hand over the operation of the field to NIOC after
development and will receive payments from the oil production for a few years to cover its investment.
China's investment in Iran's energy sector has increased as some western countries, led by the US, have sanctioned Iran
over its peaceful nuclear program.
Jacqueline Newmyer
President, Long Term Strategy Group
12 Eliot St., Cambridge, MA 02138
617-661-1620 (ph)
617-661-1626 (fax)
www.ltstrategy.com"
3588,"Called in asking to speak with you today.
Lauren Jiloty
Special Assistant to
Secretary Hillary Rodham Clinton
JilotyLC@state.gov"
3589,Will do.
3590,will call him now
3591,Sorry -- I had to step out for a bit. Heading back now.
3592,Fyi
3595,"His cell is
Karen Persichilli Keogh"
3596,"We are headed out now so had gone to bed early.
Will call when we land in miami"
3597,"Chinese)
KB)
Delivery has failed to these recipients or distribution lists:
rossdbOstate.gov
The recipient's e-mail address was not found in the recipient's e-mail system. Microsoft Exchange will not try to redeliver
this message for you. Please check the e-mail address and try resending this message, or provide the following diagnostic
text to your system administrator.
Diagnostic information for administrators:
Generating server: MSWASHDCIB02.washdc.state.sbu
rossdb@state.gov
#< #5.1.1> #SMTP#
Original message headers:
Received: from vancel.state.gov ([10.4.16.249]) by
MSWASHDCIB02.washdc.state.sbu with Microsoft SMTPSVC(6.0.3790.3959); Wed, 30
Sep 2009 07:17:32 -0400
Received: from mail.clintonemail.com (ool-18bbeabb.static.optonline.net [24.187.234.187])
by vancel.state.gov with ESMTP id n8UB61pe017765;
Wed, 30 Sep 2009 07:06:47 -0400
Received: from CLNTINET08.clinton.local ([fe80::d0bb:23d3:f75e:4993]) by
CLNTINET08.clinton.local ([fe80::dObb:23d3:f75e:4993%10]) with mapi; Wed, 30
Sep 2009 07:15:02 -0400"
3599,Will do.
3600,We'll work with Rich on this.
3601,"and...
III be sure to find him for you."
3602,"We would need Tom and Craig's guidance as to when the appropriate time is and what our people would actually
do on the ground."
3603,"Levin opposed the surge, but voted for funding the troops.
Pasted below is Levin's speech on troops in Afghanistan. We'll have a copy for you as well.
Afghan speech below
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
September 11, 2009 Contact: Senator Levin's Office
Phone: 202.224.6221
Senate Floor Speech - Surge the Afghan Army
Remarks as prepared for delivery
Today we mark a solemn anniversary. Eight years ago this morning, our nation was attacked by terrorist extremists
motivated by hatred and bent on destruction. It is always appropriate to remember the shock of that day, the innocent
lives lost, and the efforts our nation has made since that day to ensure that Afghanistan, the nation that hosted those
terrorists, cannot again become a safe haven for terrorists seeking to attack us. But today is an especially appropriate
occasion to take stock of those efforts, and consider how best to continue them.
I recently returned from a trip to Afghanistan, where I was joined by my colleagues Senators Jack Reed and Ted
Kaufman. The situation in Afghanistan is serious. Security has deteriorated. But if we take the right steps, we can ensure
that Afghanistan does not revert to a Taliban-friendly government that could once again provide a safe haven for al
Qaeda to terrorize us and the world.
The Obama administration's new strategy, focusing on securing the Afghan population's safety and partnering with the
Afghan security forces in that effort, is an important start at reversing the situation in Afghanistan. The change in
strategy has led our forces, in the words of General McChrystal's Counterinsurgency Guidance, to ""live, eat and train
together [with the Afghan security forces], plan and operate together, depend on one another, and hold each other
accountable....and treat them as equal partners in success."" The Guidance goes on to say that the success of the Afghan
security forces ""is our goal.""
To achieve that goal we should increase and accelerate our efforts to support the Afghan security forces in their efforts
to become self-sufficient in delivering security to their nation — before we consider whether to increase U.S. combat
forces above the levels already planned for the next few months. These steps include increasing the size of the Afghan
Army and police much faster than presently planned; providing more trainers for the Afghan Army and police than
presently planned; providing them more equipment than presently planned; and working to separate local Taliban
fighters from their leaders and attract them to the side of the government as we did in Iraq.
While the security situation in Afghanistan has worsened, we still have important advantages there. The Afghan people
hate the Taliban. Public opinion polls show support for the Taliban at about 5%. In addition, the Afghan army is highly
motivated and its troops are proven fighters.
Despite those advantages, we face significant challenges. General McChrystal believes, and I agree, that we need to
regain the initiative and create a momentum towards success. General McChrystal worries, and rightly so, about the
perception that we have lost that initiative, and the impact of that perception on the Afghan people, their government,
al Qaeda and the Taliban. By contrast, if we can dispel that perception, we have a chance to convince local and lower-
level Taliban fighters to lay down their arms and rejoin Afghan society.
I believe the most effective way to retake the initiative in Afghanistan is with a series of steps to ensure that
Afghanistan's army and police have the manpower, equipment and support to secure their own nation.
First, we should increase troop levels for the Afghan army and police faster than currently planned. There are
approximately 90,000 troops in the Afghan army now, and that number is scheduled to go up to 134,000 by October of
2010. The Afghan police are scheduled to reach a level of 82,000 by the same time. For a long time, many of us have
urged the establishment of a goal of 240,000 Afghan troops and 160,000 Afghan police by 2013. The Afghan Minister of
Defense has strongly supported those numbers. It now appears that our government and the Afghan government are
prepared to accept those goals. But the need for additional Afghan forces is urgent. I believe it both possible and
essential to advance those goals by a year, to 2012.
Our own military in Afghanistan has repeatedly pointed to a need for more Afghan forces. In one sector of Helmand
province we visited last week, our Marines outnumbered Afghan soldiers by 5 to one. A Marine Company commander in
Helmand province told the New York Times in July that a lack of Afghan troops ""is absolutely our Achilles heel.""
What do we need to do to increase the size of the Afghan army and police? According to Afghan Defense Minister
Wardak, there is no lack of Afghan manpower; we've been assured it is available.
But we will need significantly more trainers. We asked General Formica, who is in charge of the American effort to train
Afghan security forces, whether such an increase is possible. He indicated he would make an assessment of what would
be necessary in order to meet the earlier timetable. In the meantime, we should also press our NATO allies with much
greater forcefulness to provide more trainers. If our NATO allies are not going to come through with the combat forces
they have pledged, at least they could provide additional trainers.
Larger Afghan security forces will also require more mid-level Afghan officers. In addition to supporting efforts to
graduate more Afghan officers from army academies, we should consider the recommendation of Defense Minister
Wardak that previous mid-level officers who fought the war against the Soviets return to service on an interim basis.
Minister Wardak emphasized that those men are well qualified and well motivated, and while they may not be trained in
the most current tactics, they nonetheless could temporarily meet the need of the enlarged army while the new group
of officers is trained. A larger Afghan force will need supporting infrastructure, such a barracks. While the available
infrastructure may not be the most modern, it is adequate and exists in sufficient amounts.
Larger Afghan security forces will require additional equipment. There must be a major effort to transfer a significant
amount of the equipment that is coming out of Iraq to the Afghan army and police. Such a significant commitment to
equip the Afghan security forces would also help demonstrate U.S. determination to take the initiative and create
momentum in the right direction. There is an enormous amount of equipment coming out of Iraq; our military is calling
it one of the greatest transfers of military goods in the world's history. A significant part of it could be transferred to the
Afghan forces, increasing their capability without weakening our own readiness. And yet there does not seem to be that
kind of a crash effort in place to do that. We need to obtain on an urgent basis a list of the basic equipment needs of the
Afghan forces and a list of how those needs could be met in a major program to transfer equipment leaving Iraq.
Rapidly expanding Afghanistan's military and police forces would address one of the major problems and risks we now
face there. General McChrystal told us he worries that waiting until 2013 for a larger Afghan force creates a gap in
capabilities that brings significant risk of failure. But by accelerating the training and equipping of Afghan forces by a
year, we address his concern. Depending on additional capability from Afghan, rather than U.S., forces, also addresses a
major problem of public perception in Afghanistan. The larger our own military footprint there, the more our enemies
can seek to drive a wedge between us and the Afghan population, spreading the falsehood that we seek to dominate a
Muslim nation.
Finally, we should make a concerted effort to separate the local Taliban from their leaders. In Iraq, large numbers of
young Iraqis who had been attacking us switched over to our side and became the ""Sons of Iraq."" They were drawn in
part by the promise of jobs and amnesty for past attacks, and in part by the recognition that the status quo was creating
horrific violence in their own communities. In their own interests and the interests of their nation, they switched sides
and became a positive force.
That same prospect exists in Afghanistan. Afghan leaders and our military say that local Taliban fighters are motivated
largely by the need for a job or loyalty to the local leader who pays them and not by ideology or religious zeal. They
believe an effort to attract these fighters to the government's side could succeed, if they are offered security for
themselves and their families, and if there is no penalty for previous activity against us.
General McChrystal himself has emphasized the potential of such re-integration to accomplish the same result as was
achieved in Iraq. Here is what General McChrystal said on July 28th:
""Most of the fighters we see in Afghanistan are Afghans, some with foreign cadre with them. But most we don't see are
deeply ideological or even politically motivated; most are operating for pay; some are under a commander's charismatic
leadership; some are frustrated with local leaders. So I believe there is significant potential to go after what I would call
mid- and low-level Taliban fighters and leaders and offer them re-integration into Afghanistan under the constitution.""
But this ""game changing"" possibility was apparently not factored into General McChrystal's assessment. There is no plan
yet to put in place a Sons of Iraq approach in Afghanistan. It is urgent that we lay out the steps that need to be taken to
involve local and national Afghan leaders in that effort. They alone can accomplish this crucial job, but first we and our
Afghan allies must draft such a plan on an urgent basis. And the potential positive impact of such a plan should be taken
into account as we consider the need for any additional U.S. military resources.
Afghanistan's people are grateful for our aid, but also eager to assume responsibility for their future. In a tiny village in
Helmand Province, we were invited to meet with the village elders at their council meeting, their shura. One hundred or
so men sat on the floor and chatted with us about their future and their country's future. When asked how long the
United States should stay, one elder said: ""Until the moment that you make our security forces self-sufficient. Then you
will be welcome to visit us, not as soldiers but as guests.""
Helping Afghanistan achieve self-sufficiency in their security is everybody's goal. On that there is little difference of
opinion, in Afghanistan's village councils or in the corridors of this Capitol.
Can we help Afghanistan reach self-sufficiency in security fast enough? Can we get there in a way that regains the
initiative and creates the momentum we need? Can we encourage those lower level Taliban to abandon an insurgency
headed by terrorists whose fanaticism they don't share?
I believe we can, by supporting a far more rapid growth in the Afghan Army and police; by providing more trainers more
quickly; by a rapid infusion to Afghan units of equipment no longer needed in Iraq; and by rapidly adopting a plan for the
re-integration of lower level Taliban fighters into Afghan society. In other words, we need a surge of Afghan security
forces.
Our support of their surge will show our commitment to the success of a mission that is clearly in our national security
interest, without creating a bigger U.S. military footprint that provides propaganda fodder for the Taliban.
I believe that taking those steps on an urgent basis, while completing the previously planned and announced increase in
U.S. combat forces, provides the best chance of success for our mission: preventing Afghanistan from again being run by
a Taliban government which harbors and supports Al-Qaeda, whose goal is to inflict additional catastrophic attacks on
the United States and the world. And we should implement these steps before considering an increase in U.S. ground
combat forces beyond what is already planned by the end of this year."
3604,"Bartholomew
B6
Marshall, Capricia P; Verveer, Melanne S
RELEASE IN PART
B6"
3606,"Pakistan —total enacted since FY 2002 — FY 2009 is $8 billion (including all function 150 - foreign assistance, state and
USAID ops)
Afghanistan — total enacted FY 2001 — FY 2009 is $16.9 billion (same as above)"
3607,wants to say hello to you. Please look out for him. Thanks. Sid
3608,"and...
Will do."
3609,"Fyi from Jose re mayor villaraigosa who offered to help raise for shanghai:
""Antonio did say that he has not heard from Secy since election. I wonder how feasible it would be to get her to call him
to thank him for his commitment to help? I think he can easily raise $2m. ""
See b/I
Cdm"
3611,"Just checked in with mara. She says
Daniel Rubinstein, our Jerusalem CG, is seeing Abbas at 2pm their time, so will have a report to us by 3pm (they are 6
hours ahead, so 9am for us) -- so we will know then whether or not a call from you to him makes sense."
3612,"and...
I'll tell joe"
3613,"H: Of interest, Hague latest briefing, hostile to Tony. Tories desperately do not want Blair there, want to run their own
European policy, mostly anti-EU, and indeed break with past and continuity on Europe. Tory Party split, with anti-EU
faction dominant, its base virulent, and Cameron straddling as best he can. Hague leans anti-Europe. S
London Times
October 22, 2009
`Appointing Blair as EU president will have
consequences', warns Hague
William Hague's strident attack on his fellow Briton reportedly left some of the EU ambassadors baffled
Francis Elliott, David Charter and Tom Baldwin
William Hague has been conducting a behind-the-scenes campaign to convince European ambassadors that Tony Blair
would be a bad choice for European Union president, The Times has learnt. The Shadow Foreign Secretary used a lunch
organised by the Swedish presidency in London last week to lobby the most senior diplomats of the 26 other EU nations
against the appointment.
EU leaders had hoped to choose the new president at next week's summit, but the Czech Republic's last-minute
objections to the Lisbon treaty have scuppered that. President Sarkozy of France wants a quick decision, however, and is
understood to be pushing for a special one-day summit in Brussels next month to fill the new post.
In making the Conservatives' case against Mr Blair, Mr Hague said that while in Downing Street the former Prime Minister
had consistently placed a higher priority on US interests than on those of Europe. Mr Hague also reminded the diplomats
of Mr Blair's actions in the run-up to the Iraq war, according to one of those attending the lunch last Thursday.
A claim that Mr Hague told the ambassadors that the Tories would regard Mr Blair's appointment as a ""declaration of war""
by the EU was denied, however. A spokesman for Mr Hague said that the phrase was ""a bit strong"". Nevertheless, it was
not disputed that Mr Hague made clear that the move would have consequences for relations between Britain and
Brussels. Diplomats said that there was a ""clear mark of hostility"".
""Mr Hague wanted to leave the ambassadors in no doubt that the Conservative Party is opposed to the appointment of
Tony Blair as president of the European Council and [that] it would only underline the lack of accountability and legitimacy
involved in the creation of the position in the first place,"" Mr Hague's spokesman said. Mr Hague's strident attack on his
fellow Briton reportedly left some of the ambassadors baffled.
Mr Hague is currently in Washington for talks with members of the Obama Administration, including Hillary Clinton, the
Secretary of State, with whom he raised the issue of the Conservatives' membership of a right-wing alliance of European
parties with allegedly anti-Semitic members. He accused critics of running a smear campaign against some of the group,
led by Michal Kaminsky, head of Poland's Law and Justice Party."
3614,fyi
3615,"Iona and i wanted to give you an update on travel both alonzo and mario are recommending against travel today reagan
is still closed until this afternoon per alonzo.
mario is holding seats on 7am tomorrow.
as for trains, i talked to amtrak, they have trains running, some approx 1 hour behind schedule and a couple have
canceled but they are running today.
lona will be hearing from melanne in the next few hours or so about whether event will be on or canceled tomorrow.
will keep you updated"
3617,"Kurt campbell is asking if you would do a quick pull aside with Japanese Ambassador Fujisaki tomorrow. Kurt would do
meeting, and would bring him by for a few minutes. Pls let me know what you think.
Points he sent:"
3618,Thx.
3619,"FYI
Forwarded messa e"
3620,"Arlen Specter would like to speak to either of you regarding the possibility of the Syrians helping to free the
three American hikers held by Iran. Thinks they can be helpful."
3621,"FYI — Bill did talk to Senator Specter. It went fine. Specter was glad to hear we had approached the Syrians re: the
hikers."
3622,"I think this is a good idea — what do you think?
cdm"
3623,"I think I would want someone higher profile.
If she is doing this, it's likely as a response to incoming rather than as an affirmative agenda.
Not sure how I got to be the person pushing all things in this area -- think from the earlier efforts on family benefits but
as general matter - we have a reactive mechanism right now (to others, to me sending emails re Uganda (and now
Rwanda is doing same kind of anti-gay law)) etc.
This would be someone who's portfolio would be an affirmative agenda.
cdm"
3624,She's not coming. She's out of town.
3625,FYI
3626,"PIR <
Monday, January 25, 2010 8:54 AM
Jake Sullivan; Huma Abedin; CDM
Montreal Travelers
Half old half new faces on the plane today:
AP/Bob Burns
Reuters/Arshad
AFP/Christophe Schmidt
WP/Glenn Kessler (1st time since India)
NPR/Michele Kelleman
Ed Luce( Financial Times)
April Ryan (American Urban Radio
Ray Boone (Richmond Free Press)
Dewayne Wickham (USA Today)
Tom Jonud (Esquire Magazine)"
3627,Fyi
3628,"Gordon Brown called Lou Susman a short while ago. Brown believes you should make a call to McGuinness this morning
around 830 am (Declan and I agree that if you call McG you also must call Robinson). Brown proposes to speak with you
at 820 or so to bring you up to speed before those calls.
The current situation is that Brown and Cowen are in Belfast, and met with Robinson, McGuinness, and other parties
until 330 in the morning Belfast time. They have now resumed today. The sticking point is parades. Robinson wants the
current parades commission abolished because it gives Republicans too much say. McGuinness refuses to allow the
parades issue to be tied to the devolution issue.
The key message to McGuinness is to keep working this thing through -- not to take any drastic action that would bring
down the assembly or collapse the process.
Declan agrees that this is the moment to make calls.
If you agree we can have the ops center set up the Brown call as well as the other two.
We'll get you some more background before the calls, but talking points will be fluid and shaped in large measure by
Brown's report."
3631,FYI
3632,"Jake Sullivan
Tuesday, January 26, 2010 8:14 AM
H; Abed in, Huma (Clinton)
call sheet
Call_Sheets jjs.docx
Attached and pasted below is material for the calls
Calls to Brown and Northern Ireland Political Leaders
PM Brown has asked to brief you on ongoing negotiations convened by the UK and Irish
governments yesterday with FM Peter Robinson and dFM Martin McGuinness and their
respective teams, which lasted until 3:30 a.m. in the morning and resumed at 9:00 a.m. today.
Sinn Fein and the DUP are apparently not yet meeting face to face at Hillsborough but using the
two governments as go betweens. On-site observers have characterized the current atmosphere
between the two parties as ""poisonous.""
B6
were invited to Hillsborough yesterday night. However, these
parties tell us that this was only an informational exercise and they have yet to be included in
any substantive meetings.
Outstanding Issues: The obstacle to progress seems to be centered on the parades issue and
setting of specific dates for devolution. Robinson and the DUP are insisting on the abolishing
of the Parades Commission, an independent panel despised by the Orange Order as restricting
their desire to parade through nationalist areas, and the adoption of a new process relying on
local councils to refer potentially contentious parades to an OFM/dFM selected panel. Sinn
Fein and SDLP are both concerned that this will politicize decision-making on parades and
PSNI involvement.
In late December, the UK government renewed the Parades Commission's mandate until
December 2010, so it is expected that any new process would not be implemented until after the
summer 2010 parading season.
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Key points:
B5
Outcomes: If McGuinness resigns (likely along with the other SF ministers) thereby collapsing
the current Executive, the Northern Ireland Act provides for seven calendar days for a new
Executive to be formed. Failing that, the Assembly cease to operation and Secretary of State
Woodward is supposed to schedule new elections though he is not required to do so within a
certain timeframe. (Technically, it would take at least five weeks to organize new Assembly
elections.) B1
1.4(B)
1.4(E)"
3633,We hope so. Craig will explore tomorrow am.
3634,"Good morning Doug -
I think my response bounced back so I'm trying this again (apologies if you get two emails from me) Send me any points
you would want to have made in the letter, as well as if it should be addressed to anyone in particular, and we'll get it
done!
Thanks!"
3635,Teeing up you call to preval for today - see b/I
3636,"I just wanted to share how much the Secretary and the rest of us on the trip appreciated the paper you put together on
ACEH. As we are examining how to be a good partner to Haiti, having the benefit of this insight is helpful.
Best.
cdm"
3637,Donald payne
3638,"I'll be sure Huma knows too.
202-224-0343 w (Pat)
B6
Lauren"
3639,More
3640,I will call him but if I can't reach him I may want you to make a quick call
3641,thoughts
3642,"October 23, 2009
For: Hillary"
3644,FYI
3645,fyi
3646,"Maura:
This has really been great work. Thanks for keeping everyone focused and organized and together during the storm,
especially after Miller left, and for providing the leadership to start implementing the changes before the report was
done to create such a good outcome.
In short — thanks for stepping up and being you.
Help is on the way though she likely won't be confirmed for a bit but you've done such a great job as Acting through this
process that it will be a piece of cake to stand on your head until the A/S arrives.
cdm"
3647,fyi
3648,"We are coordinating with the canadas, the eu and a few others to try to take action on Monday collectively - we'll see
how successful we are"
3650,"The only calls we didn't get done were:
Danish FM Moller
Swedish FM Bildt
Korean FM Yu
South African FM Mashabane
Do you want to make them tomorrow?"
3651,"The team proposes to release the following statement under your name tomorrow
I think it works. Please let me know what you think:
Statement by the Secretary
On the Restoration of Democratic and Constitutional Order In Honduras November 27, 2009
The United States remains committed to help restore the democratic and constitutional order in Honduras in the wake
of the June 28 coup d'etat that removed President Zelaya and led to the suspension of Honduras from the Organization
of American States. As part of that effort, it is essential for both parties in Honduras to implement the measures they
agreed to in the Tegucigalpa-San Jose Accord, including the formation of a government of unity and national
reconciliation and the December 2 congressional vote on President Zelaya""s restitution. These are vital elements of the
Tegucigalpa-San Jose Accord, and the Honduran people and the international community expect an expeditious
determination. We look forward to the Congressional deliberations getting underway as announced.
The November 29 national elections are another critical step in the restoration of the democratic and constitutional
order in Honduras. The electoral process -- launched well before June 28 and involving legitimate candidates
representing parties with longstanding democratic traditions from a broad ideological spectrum -- is conducted under
the stewardship of the non-partisan Supreme Electoral Tribunal, which was also selected before the coup. The electoral
renewal of presidential, congressional and mayoral mandates, enshrined in the Honduran constitution, is an inalienable
expression of the sovereign will of the citizens of Honduras. We wish the Honduran people well as they choose their
new leaders on Sunday, and we urge all sides to exercise their rights peacefully.
The holding of a free, fair and transparent election is necessary but not sufficient for Honduras to reestablish the
democratic and constitutional order. In order to help achieve that objective, we will continue, along with others in the
region, to support the step-by-step implementation of the Tegucigalpa-San Jose Accord as a democratic way forward for
the Honduran people. The president-elect who emerges from an election deemed free and fair will have a unique
opportunity to promote that vital mission."
3652,See traffic below — read down
3653,Of course!
3654,"Photo is gorgeous (and there are 20 more online, some are really great)
The article is good, just way too short, so it became very matter of fact, didn't include a lot of the great stuff he saw that
day. They cut what he turned in in half.
But for this readership, that length is probably perfect. It supposedly gets seen by 70 million people. 69 million
probably never open it up and just see it in their Sunday paper, so the cover is the ballgame. Story is basically an excuse
for the cover. And the cover is a homerun.
In the end, I firmly believe it will be the totality all these in-depth projects like Vogue, National Geographic, Nightline,
Time - which I know are annoying - that are going to create a collage documenting your success, especially in terms of
style and work ethic, which I believe is what people are most interested when it comes to their perception and approval
of you."
3655,"See below - confidential.
Also for WJC."
3657,fyi
3661,"Checked with philippe on plane and he said hes professionally 100% ok for following reasons.
1)We did it for Copenhagen.
2) Condi would be dropped in Crawford on way home from foreign trips.
3) They already know and don't care.
But let me know if you want to change to dc, and I can easily tell Lew."
3662,"Will do. Egy, Turkey, Brazil and S Af all abstained. Egy at least made strong EOV."
3663,Our Posts at work.
3665,"Below is from the Economist blogger re efforts wil EU to discredit Ashton, particularly from the French. Wouldn't hurt to
mention her positively with French interlocutors. See particularly this line: ""There is, frankly, a whiff of old boy's
network against Lady Ashton: she is not a lifetime member of the honourable guild of former foreign
ministers, and she is surrounded by men in suits who think they know a lot more about foreign policy than
she does. There is not much sympathy for her complicated family life, involving young children, and much
commuting between Brussels and Britain.""
A blog by the author of our column on the European Union
Charlemagne's notebook
. Why did Lady Ashton take the EU's foreign policy job?
• Jan 26th 2010, 22:04
NOT yet February, and the briefing against Catherine Ashton, the newly appointed EU foreign policy chief,
is getting nasty. Jean Quatremer, the Brussels blogger and well-connected EU correspondent of Liberation,
dropped another depth charge against the baroness tonight. His list of complaints against her is long, and
I have a feeling some of them are a smidgeon exaggerated. I find it hard to believe it is literally
impossible to reach Lady Ashton after eight o'clock in the evening as Mr Quatremer charges, because she
allegedly has her mobile telephones diverted to the EU situation centre (a small intelligence analysis cell
staffed by officers from national servicies) after that hour. I also have some doubts about the stress laid
on the fact that she has not yet got round to having top secret security clearance yet, so cannot see any
confidential papers. As a former British cabinet minister, and serving UK commissioner, something tells
me the British at least may share just the odd secret with her.
A senior official I saw today also made the point that any holder of Lady Ashton's post would currently be
struggling with teething problems and squabbling as the new foreign policy apparatus created by the
Lisbon Treaty takes shape. There is, frankly, a whiff of old boy's network against Lady Ashton: she is not a
lifetime member of the honourable guild of former foreign ministers, and she is surrounded by men in
suits who think they know a lot more about foreign policy than she does. There is not much sympathy for
her complicated family life, involving young children, and much commuting between Brussels and Britain.
Finally, at the risk of sounding too loyal to the British, I think Mr Quatremer is being unfair when he says
that it suits the Foreign Office in London to have Lady Ashton ""sabotage"" the post. My impression is that
aritich nnvornmpni- fPPlc I (iv Achtnn nePdc a lot of sunnort riaht now and worries she is not getting
enough support, but at the same time worries that if she receives too much help in the way of briefings
and advice from British officials, she will be seen as a British stooge. That may be a self-serving sort of
fear (because it allows the British to offer Lady Ashton lots of help) but it is real enough.
Other charges probably have something to them. They certainly chime with things I have been told by
other people.
But most damaging, to my mind, is the intimate nature of some of the briefing: this stuff is coming from
officials close to Lady Ashton, or who are senior enough to have significant contact with her. And I can
confirm from my own conversations that people across the whole EU foreign policy machine are asking the
same question: why did she take this huge job, when her instinct seems to be to make it as low key as
possible? That is a dangerous question mark to have hanging over you."
3666,She is headed downstairs to do a quick interview with Andrea Mitchell and then she's off to the PC. I'll try!!
3667,Cloture invoked on Bernake nomination 77-23. Final vote on nomination now.
3668,Yes.
3669,Calling you now.
3670,Ops has not be able to reach you
3673,I will be on travel from 12/8 through 12/20 — back in the office on the 21st..
3675,"Thank you SO much! We will get the photo off widely.
Had a good meeting w Melinda Gates. They are ready to support our maternal and child health initiative. Your husband
touched everyone here with his Haiti plea.
We're making good progress on women's issues."
3676,fyi
3681,"Thanks so much. I think that, given what was possible, we got a very good result.
Thanks for all your unwavering support throughout the year and for the pivotal role you played in the final 48 hours.
Your diplomacy Thursday was hugely important, starting to shift things in our direction, and then the President's
intervention Friday put us over the top. An awesome 1-2 punch -- the best in the whole wide world. I'm honored every
single day to work for you. Hope you get some rest over the holidays. Best, Todd"
3683,He now works for us
3684,Thanks.
3685,"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Friday, January 29, 2010 6:47 AM
Re: a couple of powerful quotes from foreign media which we highlighted in our cable
Thx. Had a great conversation with Doug Hattaway.
Will fill you in when I see you.
Also working with Amb Pascual on a new strategy for Mexicom
Finally working with Cheryl to help GoH with communication from g to p.
On my way to India and bangalesh."
3686,"I just sent talking points to Huma regarding your interview with Mark Landler on the Shanghai Expo
Sorry I had to miss the Senate office festivities at Tamera's last night. Heard it was great.
Merry Christmas to you and Chelsea and the President. Your family has been wonderful to me and my family over the
years. Thank you.
Kris"
3687,"I second Philippe's take, on all counts."
3689,Let me know what you think.
3690,"There is a very elegant picture of you on the front page of the IHT. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
3692,Plus - I made a new friend in Les Gelb - we have connected on our love of cats (he has 3)
3693,"FYI -- we ended up not sending the letter this afternoon because Lautenberg's staff was being difficult and hedging.
Now, we can update and send tomorrow (if it is still required) based on latest information from tonight's ruling, as you
had intended from the start."
3694,See highlight
3695,"sbwhoeop
Tuesday, December 22, 2009 7:28 PM
any truth to this account? Sid
H: Is this account true? If so, significant, and the only account of its kind. And, if true, the USG has not told its story, at the
least. Sid
X
r --r
How do I know China wrecked the Copenhagen
deal? I was in the room
As recriminations fly post-Copenhagen, one writer offers a fly-on-the-wall account of how talks faded
0
0 Mark cvnas
o c.
..q,uk, Tuesday 22 December 2009 19.54 GMT
Copenhagen was a disaster. That much is agreed. But the truth about what actually happened is in danger of being lost
amid the spin and inevitable mutual recriminations. The truth is this: Chrs.a wrecked the talks, intentionally humiliated
Barack Obama, and insisted on an awful ""dear so western leaders would walk away carrying the blame. How do I know
this? Because I was in the room and saw it happen.
China's strategy was simple: block the open negotiations for two weeks, and then ensure that the closed-door deal made
It look as if the west had failed the world's poor once again. And sure enough, the aid agencies, civil society movements
and environmental groups all took the bait. The failure was ""the inevitable result of rich countries refusing adequately and
fairly to shoulder their overwhelming responsibility"", said Christian Aid. ""Rich countries have bullied developing nations,""
fumed Friends of the Earth International.
All very predictable, but the complete opposite of the truth. Even George IVIonbiot, writing in yesterday's Guardian, made
the mistake of singly blaming Obama. But I saw Obama fighting desperately to salvage a deal, and the Chinese delegate
saying ""no"", over and over again. Monbiot even approvingly quoted the Sudanese delegate Lumumba Di-Aping, who
denounced the Copenhagen accord as ""a suicide pact, an incineration pact, in order to maintain the economic dominance
of a few countries"".
Sudan behaves at the talks as a puppet of China; one of a number of countries that relieves the Chinese delegation of
having to fight its battles in open sessions. It was a perfect stitch-up. China gutted the deal behind the scenes, and then
left its proxies to savage it in public.
Here's what actually went on late last Friday night, as heads of state from two dozen countries met behind closed doors.
Obama was at the table for several hours, sitting between Gordon Brown and the Ethiopian prime minister, Males Zenawi.
The Danish prime minister chaired, and on his right sat Ban Ki-moon, secretary-general of the UN. Probably only about 50
or 60 people, including the heads of state, were in the room. I was attached to one of the delegations, whose head of
state was also present for most of the time.
What I saw was profoundly shocking. The Chinese premier, Wen Jinbao, did not deign to attend the meetings personally,
instead sending a second-tier official in the country's foreign ministry to sit opposite Obama himself. The diplomatic snub
was obvious and brutal, as was the practical implication: several times during the session, the world's most powerful
heads of state were forced to wait around as the Chinese delegate went off to make telephone calls to his ""superiors"".
Shifting the blame
To those who would blame Obama and rich countries in general, know this: it was China's representative who insisted
that industrialised country targets, previously agreed as an 80% cut by 2050, be taken out of the deal. ""Why can't we even
mention our own targets?"" demanded a furious Angela Merkel. Australia's prime minister, Kevin Rudd, was annoyed
enough to bang his microphone. Brazil's representative too pointed out the illogicality of China's position. Why should rich
countries not announce even this unilateral cut? The Chinese delegate said no, and I watched, aghast, as Merkel threw
up her hands in despair and conceded the point. Now we know why — because China bet, correctly, that Obama would
get the blame for the Copenhagen accord's lack of ambition.
China, backed at times by India, then proceeded to take out all the numbers that mattered. A 2020 peaking year in global
emissions, essential to restrain temperatures to 2C, was removed and replaced by woolly language suggesting that
emissions should peak ""as soon as possible"". The long-term target, of global 50% cuts by 2050, was also excised. No one
else, perhaps with the exceptions of India and Saudi Arabia, wanted this to happen. I am certain that had the Chinese not
been in the room, we would have left Copenhagen with a deal that had environmentalists popping champagne corks
popping in every corner of the world.
Strong position
So how did China manage to pull off this coup? First, it was in an extremely strong negotiating position. China didn't need
a deal. As one developing country foreign minister said to me: ""The Athenians had nothing to offer to the Spartans."" On
the other hand, western leaders in particular — but also presidents Lula of Brazil, Zuma of South Africa, Calderon of
Mexico and many others — were desperate for a positive outcome. Obama needed a strong deal perhaps more than
anyone. The US had confirmed the offer of $100bn to developing countries for adaptation, put serious cuts on the table for
the first time (17% below 2005 levels by 2020), and was obviously prepared to up its offer.
Above all, Obama needed to be able to demonstrate to the Senate that he could deliver China in any global climate
regulation framework, so conservative senators could not argue that US carbon cuts would further advantage Chinese
industry. With midterm elections looming, Obama and his staff also knew that Copenhagen would be probably their only
opportunity to go to cjinT3t?j..chanQE-3. talks with a strong mandate. This further strengthened China's negotiating hand, as
did the complete lack of civil society political pressure on either China or India. Campaign groups never blame developing
countries for failure; this is an iron rule that is never broken. The Indians, in particular. have become past masters at ca-
opting the language of equity (""equal rights to the atmosphere"") in the service of planetary suicide — and leftish
campaigners and commentators are hoist with their own petard.
With the deal gutted, the heads of state session concluded with a final battle as the Chinese delegate insisted on
removing the 1.5C target so beloved of the small island states and low-lying nations who have most to lose from rising
seas. President Nasheed of the Maldives, supported by Brown, fought valiantly to save this crucial number. ""How can you
ask my country to go extinct?"" demanded Nasheed. The Chinese delegate feigned great offence — and the number
stayed, but surrounded by language which makes it all but meaningless. The deed was done.
China's game
All this raises the question: what is China's game? Why did China, in the words of a UK-based analyst who also spent
hours in heads of state meetings, ""not only reject targets for itself, but also refuse to allow any other country to take on
binding targets?"" The analyst, who has attended climate conferences for more than 15 years, concludes that China wants
to weaken the climate regulation regime now ""in order to avoid the risk that it might be called on to be more ambitious in a
few years' time"".
This does not mean China is not serious about global warming. It is strong in both the wind and solar industries. But
China's growth, and growing global political and economic dominance, is based largely on cheap coal. China knows it is
becoming an uncontested superpower; indeed its newfound muscular confidence was on striking display in Copenhagen.
Its coal-based economy doubles every decade, and its power increases commensurately. Its leadership will not alter this
magic formula unless they absolutely have to.
Copenhagen was much worse than just another bad deal, because it illustrated a profound shift in global geopolitics. This
is fast becoming China's century, yet its leadership has displayed that multilateral environmental governance is not only
not a priority, but is viewed as a hindrance to the new superpower's freedom of action. I left Copenhagen more
despondent than I have felt in a long time. After all the hope and all the hype, the mobilisation of thousands, a wave of
optimism crashed against the rock of global power politics, fell back, and drained away.
[Go]"
3696,Fyi
3697,"Will give some thought and pass along any names I can think of.
Jm"
3698,"RELEASE IN PART
B1,1.4(B),1.4(D)"
3699,FYI.
3700,He released his hold. No need for the call.
3701,"B5
- see b/I"
3702,Of course!
3703,Nice
3704,Remind me to discuss
3705,"And after he lifted his hold, the trade preference legislation passed the senate tonight. You probably saw they are
voting on final passage on the health reform bill and debt limit increase on Thursday morning beginning at 8 am. I would
expect and hope for our nominees to move after that."
3706,Fyi
3708,Love it!!
3709,"We had a little fun at today's briefing. Our friends in the media have been bugging us regarding your holiday plans, so
we announced your departure from Washington in the following way:
""...And finally, a few of you have asked about the schedule of the Secretary of State over the next few days. I can tell
you this morning the Secretary departed Washington and she stopped at the North Pole for an important bilateral
meeting with a well known international figure. During the meeting, in a formal demarche, sung to the tune of Twelve
Days of Christmas, the Secretary outlined her aspirations for the new year. They include, and feel free to hum
along: open and accountable governments, Middle East negotiations, more civilians in Afghanistan, empowerment of
women, fewer nuclear weapons, respect for human rights, resolution of historic grievances, treaties through the United
States Senate, Six-Party Talks, dialogue with Iran, enough food for people of the world to eat, climate change legislation,
and lastly, a championship for the Boston Red Sox. Okay, that last one's not on her list, but Harold Koh and I thought it
was important that we mention that here.""
It is a privilege to be a part of your team. We wish you, the President and Chelsea all the best during the holiday season
and look forward to great achievements in 2010, with one tiny exception.
Pi"
3710,"PosnerM H @state.gov
202-647-2126 work
PallyMM@state.gov
(202) 647-6427 work
I'm working on getting cell numbers for you."
3711,"Mike posner additional numbers
Ill make sure these are all saved in your bb on monday."
3712,"Stern, Todd D (S/SECC) <SternTD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 3, 2010 1:33 PM
Huma Abedin; Stern, Todd D (S/SECC)
Re: Question
Hi. Hope you've gotten some rest! We're at O'Hare on way back to DC
Todd"
3713,Fyi
3714,"Here's the update, pieced together from various sources:
Starting at around 3 pm Friday, Adams and McGuinness returned to Hillsborogh to meet with Robinson and Arlene
Foster. The four talked privately for several hours and then asked for the draft papers to review. The discussion
continued until around 1 am when the parties left Hillsborough. (Foster's presence is apparently very helpful. Her
relationship with the SF leaders is much more positive and direct, treating them as equal colleagues.)
Woodward and Irish FM Martin will meet with Adams and Robinson separately this afternoon to assess where the talks
are. The talks last night/early morning ended more positively and if that is still the case there may be a decision to push
on today to see if agreement can be reached. It is equally possible that the two ministers and DUP/SF will decide to
wind up today and resume on Monday.
Brown and Cowen have spoken this morning and will speak again late this afternoon.
The issue is still parades. Robinson needs some certainity of change on parades. It is important for him politically within
the DUP, but also externally since this has become a symbol of whether he has achieved something or compromised too
much. Adams and SF have moved very far from their original positions on parades, adding that Robinson has also
moved.
The DUP linkage of the timeframes for devolution and parades is not Robinson's goal but DUP deputy party leader Nigal
Dodds. Logistically, such a linkage would be impossible without delaying devolution given that the parades framework
requires consultation, legislation, and implementation.
The role of Justice Minister and his/her relationship to the Executive has been agreed. Other issues, such as Irish
language act, N-S bodies, etc, while symbolic and emotive for SF and the nationalists community can be dealt with."
3715,"Happy New Year to you as well! It's been an honor to work for you. I'm excited -- and bracing -- for the work ahead.
As for business, I've sent along the outline for the year-end POTUS report and the first weekly Af-Pak report."
3716,"Subject: Latest on Goldman Decision
Ops just passed us the following on latest developments in the Goldman case, courtesy of our Embassy in Brasilia:
-- David Goldman's Brazilian lawyer and the family's attorney are currently attempting to negotiate a ""voluntary return.""
--If those talks fail, Goldman will request the Brazilian police execute the involuntary return ordered yesterday by a
Brazilian judge. This outcome would create a negative PR climate.
--Brazilian police ""think"" they know the boy's whereabouts.
--Return to US likely will occur on an NBC News-chartered aircraft, as Goldman has inked some sort of exclusive deal w/
NBC for the story.
--Post has been working with WHA and PD on a possible S statement."
3717,Saw that you called directly so we assume you will call in for second call ? he is ready
3718,fyi
3719,"Importance: High
fyi"
3720,It's 745 pm -- they're still talking. British think it's reasonably positive.
3721,Sounds great. Will do.
3722,"Sorry - been on calls all day re coordination for haiti
How about 8am or 830am sun?"
3723,"Thank you so much - it's a pleasure and an honor!
I'll get to work on these first thing tomorrow morning and I'll consult with Huma to fill in the blanks.
Have a safe trip back to DC!"
3724,"FYI — Meeting with Melanne and Margaret on Monday.
cdm"
3725,"With your permission, we are changing the statement to spokesman's name rather than yours. Makes it a more generic
statement of U.S. policy and holds you in reserve.
We have tweaked the first paragraph to make clear our expectation.
On Mexico, consensus is that a call is worthwhile, but we will get you an updated call sheet that accounts for intervening
events.
The remaining Honduras related call sheets are also coming your way.
Please let me know if I can help with anything else."
3726,"According to Woodward, the likely announcement as been delayed till 3 p.m. (Belfast time) due to the need for
additional consultations — between SF and DUP and then DUP with its Assembly and MP caucus. Time of announcement
may be further pushed back. Will keep you informed."
3727,"Of course. I will not forward any of your emails and I appreciate your sending notes on issues you want to make sure we
are tracking!"
3728,fyi
3729,You keep asking what she is doing there - I am not sure though I know I had her itinerary b/f she left - will try to find it
3730,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Friday, November 27, 2009 4:47 PM
H
Fw: Call from Sam Lewis
Fyi"
3731,"Prince
Heads up - will forward more as known"
3732,"http://www.dailykos.com/storyonly/2009/11/27/808503/-Weekly-Tracking-Poll:-New-Feature-Paints-Ugly-2010-Picture
QUESTION: In the 2010 Congressional elections will you definitely vote, probably vote, not likely vote, or
definitely will not vote?
The results were, to put it mildly, shocking:
Voter Intensity: Definitely + Probably Voting/Not Likely + Not Voting
Republican Voters: 81/14
Independent Voters: 65/23
DEMOCRATIC VOTERS: 56/40"
3734,"Shaun just called to say matters are held up because Robinson, who is completely committed to resolution, is dealing with
his party, of which a majority but not all are behind him. Shaun wants this information conveyed only to you, kept outside
the system, and he says he'll be in touch. Sid"
3735,"Call Sheet.doc
Hrc - did jake or anyone discuss calling Argentina, uruguay and Peru on both honduras and copenhagen issues? Calls
could take place tomorrow. I've attached call sheets for oscar to print for you. Please let us know if u want to schedule."
3737,fyi
3740,"FYI
^"
3741,"Set for 12:30
You are calling redswitch from your black ste phone
202-647-5926"
3742,III get back to you
3743,"Yes line dropped
Rest is coming now"
3744,"Will do. Just returning from Africa AU meetings. Much to report.
Best,
Maria"
3747,Second update
3748,Yes but hang up one more time. So they can reestablish the line.
3749,Just pick up phone and hang it up. And leave it hung up.
3750,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, Janua 30 S S 0 PM
H; cheryl.mills
Re: Have you received email from Bill w letter from Ban yet?
Just came - am sendng my comments to laura later tonight - want to compare it to architecture doc for un-us-goh that
has been subject of multiple calls today"
3751,Ok.
3752,"B6
Because of time difference, reaching all the embassies is challenging but I can type up something quickly and send
somethig latter this afternoon so long as you know its all completely tentative.
lm doing a call in a few minutes with
and then have a call with phil Gordon to review EUR priorities cause we
will be in Europe in less than a month, and it turns out that merkel is less flexible with dates than we thought."
3753,"January 30, 2010
For: Hillary"
3754,"Thank you. I will spend next week reviewing the recent IG report of my bureau. Gave us good marks on the technical
side of what we do, but there is definitely work to be done on our organizational structure, some leadership issues in
specific offices and how we interact and communicate across our various functions. On the planning side, thanks to the
2010 look ahead memos that the bureaus prepared for you, we will be more effective in creating media and outreach
opportunities because our focus will be not just on this week, but looking ahead to the month and quarter as well. We
have been briefing-centric in the past. We will be creating more channels to communicate our messages. I know Judith
spoke with you on Monday about greater emphasis on international media. We will be restructuring part of my
operation to be able to do that. Going through these issues, I'll either be well-rested or exhausted, but I am looking
forward to 2010.
PJ"
3756,"I am currently out of the office and will be checking e-mail periodically. If you need immediate assistance, please call
202-647-9573."
3757,"Missed Shaun, but was just on the phone with his COS, who said there are still some details to be worked out Monday.
She ""wouldn't put a full stop on it,"" but things are looking very good.
Looks like tomorrow will be a down day and then they'll reconvene Monday to try to bang out the last details and
announce."
3758,"Just tried emailing you but not sure it went through --
Missed Shaun, but talked to his COS a short while ago. She said there are still a few details to be worked out Monday.
She ""wouldn't put a full stop on it,"" though things are looking very good. Tomorrow will be a down day and they'll
reconvene Monday to bang out last details and (hopefully) announce.
I'll be in touch with other people in the morning and give you there reports.
Will also check in with DecIan!"
3760,Will do.
3761,Fyi
3763,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Wednesday, December 23, 2009 5:55 PM
H
FW: Visa for India B6
Fyi in case reached you directly She called me about visa issue for her son We just took care of it"
3764,"Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.goy>
Wednesday, December 23, 2009 6:12 PM
H
Re:
B6
MS-
Lauren"
3766,"I get back the morning of February 9 and will be in the office that afternoon. I'll email you and Lona a copy of my
schedule. Walter Douglas and Dan Sreebney have been working with me on Haiti. Walter is in California for Victoria
DeLongh's funeral and will be back in the office Tuesday. He has been working closely with Dan Smith on the Haiti
initiative. Let me know if there is anything you need me to do from here.
im"
3768,"FYI
Schedule so far.
jm"
3769,Ok calling now.
3771,"Lew, Jacob J <LewJJ@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 23, 2009 10:23 PM
H
Talking Points on Budget
RELEASE IN PART
B5"
3772,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, January 31, 2010 10:35 AM
H
Woodward
You're set to go to talk to Shaun at 11. Those we spoke with today confirm that a deal is close and likely. Low level work
happening today; Robinson consulting w DUP tomorrow am."
3773,"Thank you for your message. I am currently traveling and will be out of the office until Thursday 2/11/10.
If you need assistance with a scheduling matter please reach out to my Scheduler, Eric Woodard, at 202-647-1522.
For all other issues needing immediate attention please contact my Chief-of-Staff, Simon Limage, at 202-647-1749."
3774,"Interesting observations from DecIan:
Foster was a critical component in the talks apparently. However there is already speculation that PR may use this
moment to try to come back early and resume position of FM given that the other investigations have been delayed
pending the outcome of the police investigation. He went to London with his family yesterday to visit his wife, who is in
a clinic there apparently.
Empey still not on board apparently so the ""community confidence"" round may be used to put pressure on him to do so.
Our intervention on Thursday night/Friday morning was seen as a very important moment/catalyst. That, coupled with
the jobs losses that day and the fact that the radio and tv phone-in lines and newspapers were full of commentary
supporting what we said, seems to have made people realize, that they couldn't lose the moment."
3775,Sorry if sending twice
3776,"Cc: H
Oscar, this is call sheet for FM Kouchner
Call is NOT confirmed yet but might be tomorrow morning
I am also faxing this"
3777,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 31, 2010 12:17 PM
Travel Schedule
CANDIDATES WEEKEND - NEAR FINAL SCHEUDLE_012510.doc
Here was CVC's schedule:
B6"
3779,Got readout from ops -- will be prepared.
3780,"Cc:
Oscar, this is final call sheet for FM Okada
Call is confirmed for 8:30am.
Also faxing"
3781,"Brown has asked to speak with you at 8 am tomorrow morning.
Also, I just spoke with Declan about the conference. There are challenges with the idea of a conference that I'd like to
discuss with you in the morning."
3783,"I've just asked the Specials to fax the draft to you in Chappaqua. You should be getting it shortly. Hopefully this is a start.
Feedback welcome, of course."
3784,FYI below. Harold is proposing to send substantive views on the Pfizer case
3785,got them - spoke with Jack right bif he you all spoke last night
3786,"To rebuild Haiti, start with its young people A 700,000-strong national civic service corps would harness untapped labor
rapidly and instill national pride and confidence.
By Robert Muggah and Robert Maguire
January 31, 2010
Haiti will need big ideas to recover and rebuild in the aftermath of the devastating magnitude 7.0 earthquake this
month. The reported death toll has topped 150,000, and the reconstruction needs are incalculable. How about starting
with a 700,000-strong national civic service corps made up of Haitian youth? There are many reasons why such an entity
makes a lot of sense.
Haiti is a young country. An estimated 70% of the population is under 30; the 15-to-29 segment alone makes up 50% of
the population.
Demographers have long cautioned how excessively youthful populations can potentially exacerbate underdevelopment
and accentuate political instability.
Although Haiti registers among the lowest levels of education in the Western Hemisphere, Haitian youth are a wellspring
of creativity, talent and potential. You don't need to be a community-development specialist to know that they are
stifled by a lack of meaningful opportunities.
Fortunately, Haiti has an enabling environment to set up a civic service corps. Article 52 of the Haitian Constitution
commits citizens to national service, though it has never been activated. What is more, there are many Haitian and
international organizations mobilized and ready to help the government get this going.
A civic service corps would get the young and able out of the tent cities in and around Port-au-Prince and into work.
They could start with the once-iconic center of the capital, but also could begin planting trees, working the fields and
providing services in Haiti's countryside.
At a minimum, this would reverse generations of unfair stigmatizing of the youth there.
This plan would also harness untapped labor rapidly. Before the Jan. 12 earthquake, 50% of youth in their 20s were out
of work. Putting them in service toward rebuilding the capital and outlying areas would be a first step to restoring their
and their country's pride and dignity.
A civic service corps would also multiply international efforts to promote recovery after the world moves on to the next
crisis. Hundreds of humanitarian agencies, donor governments and nongovernmental organizations are facing
monumental challenges in coordinating relief assistance. Although everyone involved is committed to rapid
disbursement, transaction costs are monumental. A civic service corps would allow for a more rapid form of transferring
capital.
Direct support to such a corps would inject serious liquidity into the Haitian economy and stimulate recovery from the
bottom up. Rather than food-for-work schemes, international best practice recommends proposals that promote direct
monetary transfers to beneficiaries. Haitian youth and their families have urgent needs and don't need paternalistic
programs that curb their choices. With proper oversight and financial safeguards, a civic service corps would circumvent
unnecessary administrative costs.
Further, a civic service corps would restore national pride and confidence in Haitian public institutions. During past
decades, the state provided relatively few services to Haitians, particularly outside the capital. In some cases, state
entities were downright predatory. As a result, nonstate providers, including gangs and shady middlemen, filled the gap.
A civic service corps -- wearing the Haitian colors and acting as first responders or organizations demonstrating the
government's presence on the ground -- would show that the government is serious about supporting citizens. It would
be a symbolic first step toward renewing the social contract with the people.
A civic service corps also makes sense for long-term risk and emergency planning. Haiti is situated in the path of
hurricanes and on a fault line, and can expect more disasters. Training 700,000 young people -- especially young women
-- in the basics of first aid, emergency response, community policing and other skills would greatly mitigate the
consequences of future calamities. With disciplined training and management, the corps could provide more intensive
training in specialized areas -- engineering, telecommunications and public health.
An initial step to getting Haiti's youth to work could include the preparation of a road map for future meetings on Haiti,
including the U.N. donor conference scheduled for March. Any final plan would need to draw on the invaluable
experiences of ongoing efforts to mobilize youth in Haiti. These include the work of the Brazilian nongovernmental
organization Viva Rio and its supporters. Before the earthquake, Viva Rio and Brazilian peacekeepers had recruited and
trained hundreds of Haitian youth, including former gang members, to provide relief services in Haiti's slums. This
program could be reactivated and scaled up quickly.
A civic service corps could draw on the lessons from such groups to target and recruit youths for, say, up to two years.
The Haitian government would, of course, need to be the one to manage the undertaking, with direct oversight from the
president's office and the Interior Ministry.
And there are many countries that could provide advice and support.
Nongovernmental groups and private donors could also play a key role in mobilizing support and transferring essential
skills.
Haiti's youth are the future of the nation, and they are central to Haiti's recovery. A civic service corps is a large-scale
way to quickly mobilize them to act as catalyst for long-term, progressive changes.
Robert Muggah, based at the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva, is a principal of
the SecDev Group and is currently advising multilateral and bilateral organizations on Haiti's recovery. Robert Maguire is
on the faculty of Trinity Washington University and chairs the Haiti Working Group of the United States Institute of
Peace in Washington.
Copyright (c) 2010, The Los Angeles Times"
3787,Ok
3788,"Bjk has also been in very close touch with nina bishop, who does great work in the sports united office (under ECA). III
make sure she and maura also connect."
3789,I just landed in London and will work on it with Gary Samore first thing Monday and will get back to you asap Ellen.
3790,"Sure. It should have been sent three hours ago. Will figure out what happened.
On Jan 31, 2010, at 5:13 PM, H wrote:
> I was out but upon return, did not find a faxed speech. Can you track
> down?"
3792,"If Huma is with you, she has an electronic copy and apparently was going to print it for you rather than use a faxed
version. FYI: It is not in speech font yet -- I just wanted you to see where this is going, but we can send one with bigger
spacing and bigger type too in case you want to write your own thoughts on it.
On Jan 31, 2010, at 5:13 PM, H wrote:
> I was out but upon return, did not find a faxed speech. Can you track
> down?
>
>"
3794,"RELEASE IN PART
B6"
3795,"Thx
Sent from my iPhone
On Jan 31, 2010, at 5:45 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> I now have it. Thx
>"
3796,Kris balderston urging you to call bloomberg. We will have time tomorrow if you want to do it.
3798,"Gordon, Philip H <GordonPH@state.gov>
Sunday, January 31, 2010 7:22 PM
H; Tauscher, Ellen 0
Sullivan, Jacob J
RE: NSS invites
Phil"
3799,"Importance: High
Fyi - we should do handwritten notes to them"
3800,Will call you after 630 - just got out of pool w/ kidlets
3801,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, December 24, 2009 8:56 AM
Fw: WHEELS UP on GOLDMAN
Assume you are getting these updates as well."
3805,"yes we can
i will take care of it
and we will take care of signature"
3806,You should call Kyl. I can't get to him.
3807,They are doing points per b/I
3808,Will call you now
3809,"His cell is:
Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Thursday, December 24, 2009 9:35 AM
Re: Trying to call you--call me thru ops.
B6"
3810,"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Thursday, December 24, 2009 9:40 AM
Abedin, Huma
Re: Trying to call you—call me thru ops.
Try: B6"
3811,And I have 3 letters in my possession that we are handing to Kyl's office now.
3812,Your friend
3813,Ok
3814,Yes. Working it now
3815,He is clear and will be confirmed. Thank you and sorry for the fire drill.
3816,Sure will.
3818,"Rajiv Shah
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Current Under Secretary Rajiv Shah
Rajiv ""Raj"" Shah (born March 9, 1973) is presently Under Secretary of Agriculture for Research, Education,
and Economics (REE) and Chief Scientist at the United States Department of Agriculture.
Prior to his appointment at USDA, Shah worked in a range of leadership roles at the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation including Director of Agricultural Development, Director of Financial Services, leader of the
Strategic Opportunities initiative and manager of the Foundation's $1.5 billion commitment to the Vaccine
Fund. He also came up with the idea for the International Finance Facility for Immunization to transform the
global system of vaccine financing, and worked to secure donor commitments of more than $5 billion for this
facility. Before joining the Gates Foundation, Shah was a health care policy advisor on the Al Gore presidential
campaign, 2000 and a member of Governor Ed Rendell's (D-PA) transition committee on health.
Shah earned his M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and M.Sc. in Health Economics
at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. He is a graduate of the University of Michigan and
also attended the London School of Economics.
President Obama announced Shah's selection as Under Secretary of Research, Education, and Economics and
Chief Scientist on April 17, 2009. Shah's nomination was confirmed by the United States Senate by unanimous
consent on May 12, 2009.
Early life and family
Born to Indian immigrant parents who settled in Ann Arbor, Michigan in the late 60's, Raj Shah grew up in the
Detroit area and attended Wylie Groves High School.
He lives with his wife, Shivam, and their two young children, Sajan and Amna. He has one sister, Ami Shah,
who is a medical doctor.
Career
Raj Shah is currently the Under Secretary of Research, Education and Economics (REE) and Chief Scientist at
the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The REE mission area provides the science that federal agencies, policy
makers, researchers, and others draw on to meet challenges facing America's food and agriculture system. The
four REE agencies are the Agricultural Research Service (including the National Agricultural Library), the
Economic Research Service, the National Agricultural Statistics Service, and the Cooperative State Research,
Education and Extension Service.
Prior to his appointment at USDA Raj worked in a range of leadership roles at the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation to help the poorest people on earth lead healthy and productive lives.
As the Director of the Agricultural Development program, Shah oversaw the foundation's multi-billion dollar
portfolio of grant and program-related investments to help transform rural economies throughout the developing
world and help small farmers and their families overcome hunger and poverty. He led efforts to create the
Alliancefor a Green Revolution in Africa, helped recruit its leadership including UN Secretary General Kofi
Annan, and serves on its Board of Directors. He oversaw grant portfolios in science and technology; farmer
productivity; market access; and policy, statistics and advocacy; and managed a team of more than 60
professionals. He also developed innovative partnerships with private industry, the United Nations, the World
Bank, and country governments around the world, where he was an active voice on issues related to food and
hunger.
As the Foundation's first Director for the Financial Services to the Poor portfolio, Shah worked with a broad
range of financial institutions and other donors to determine how Foundation resources could best amplify the
field's collective impact. Previously, he led the Strategic Opportunities initiative which worked with Foundation
co-chairs to identify, assess and recommend new areas of giving. This process led to the creation of the
Foundation's Global Development Program.
Shah's early work with the Foundation focused on global health. As Deputy Director for Policy and Finance,
Raj managed the Foundation's $1.5 billion commitment to the Vaccine Fund — an effort referred to by Bill and
Melinda Gates as their best investment. He also came up with the idea for the International Finance Facility for
Immunization to transform the global system of vaccine financing and worked to secure donor commitments of
more than $5 billion for this facility. The World Health Organization estimates this initiative will save more
than five million children's lives through the next decade, and a New York Times article described the effort as
""a clever way to reduce the burden of costly diseases now and save money in the future.""
Shah previously worked as a health care policy advisor on the Gore 2000 presidential campaign, was an active
supporter of the Barack Obama presidential campaign, 2008, and served as a member of Pennsylvania Governor
Ed Rendell's health transition committee. He also co-founded Health Systems Analytics (a health care
consulting firm), served as an advisor to the City of Philadelphia's Public Health Commissioner, and worked at
the World Health Organization. In addition, he co-founded multiple nonprofit organizations focused on
increasing the political awareness and civic engagement of minority communities, including Project Impact for
South Asian Americans."
3819,"Lael Brainard
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Lad Brainard was a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution from 2001 to 2009, and served as the vice
president and director of the Global Economy and Development program from June 2006 to March 16, 2009.
Brainard has been nominated by President Barack Obama to be Under Secretary of the Treasury for
International Affairs.al
Brainard served as Deputy National Economic Adviser and Chair of the Deputy Secretaries Committee on
International Economics during the Clinton Administration. As Deputy Director of the National Economic
Council, she helped build a new White House organization to address global economic challenges such as the
Asian financial crisis and China's WTO entry. As the US Sherpa to the G8, she helped shape the 2000 G8
Development Summit that for the first time included leaders of the poorest nations and laid the foundations for
the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria. She has been mentioned as a likely U.S. Trade Representative
in the Obama administration. 121
Previously, Brainard served as Associate Professor of Applied Economics at the MIT Sloan School of
Management, where her publications made important contributions on the relationship between offshore
production, trade, and jobs; the measurement of structural and cyclical unemployment in the US economy; and
strategic trade policy. Brainard has also worked at McKinsey & Co. advising corporate clients on strategic
challenges and on microenterprise in West Africa.
Brainard is an alumna of the George School class of 1979, a boarding school in Newtown, PA. Brainard
received masters and doctoral degrees in Economics from Harvard University, where she was a National
Science Foundation Fellow. She graduated with highest honors from Wesleyan University with a degree from
the College of Social Studies. She is the recipient of a White House Fellowship and a Council on Foreign
Relations International Affairs Fellowship, a Marshall Scholar elect, and a member of the Wesleyan University
Board of Trustees, Council on Foreign Relations, and Aspen Strategy Group.
Publications
Brainard is co-editor of Too Poor For Peace? (2007); co-editor of Offshoring White Collar Work (2006); editor
of Transforming the Development Landscape: the Role of the Private Sector (2006) and Security by Other
Means: Foreign Assistance, Global Poverty and American Leadership (2006); and coauthor of The Other War:
Global Poverty and the Millennium Challenge Corporation (2004). On March 23, 2009 she was nominated as
Under-Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs by President Barack Obama.
Select recent publications include ""Services Offshoring, American Jobs, and the Global Economy,"" with Robert
E. Litan, Perspectives on Work (Winter 2005); ""Reassessing National Security,"" with Michael O'Hanlon, in
Alice Rivlin and Isabel Sawhill, eds., Restoring Fiscal Sanity (2004); ""Building Common Ground on Trade
Demands More Than a Name Change,"" with Hal Shapiro, The George Washington International Law Review,
2003; ""Compassionate Conservatism Confronts Global Poverty,"" The Washington Quarterly, Spring 2003;
""The Implications for the Global Economy of America's Campaign against Terrorism,"" Cambridge Review of
International Affairs, July 2002; and ""Are U.S. Multinationals Exporting U.S. Jobs?"" with David Riker, in
David Greenaway and Douglas Nelson, eds., Globalization and Labour Markets (Elgar, 2001).
Brainard is married to Kurt Campbell, who was nominated in April as assistant secretary of state for East Asian
and Pacific affairs.121"
3820,Calling you in a bit before I leave the office.
3821,"RELEASE IN
PART B6"
3822,"First, Tom's travel date hasn't been set -- will be Tuesday or Wednesday we think. He is coordinating with Dan Restrepo
to see if they can go together.
1.4
B1
— Reason: 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 06/29/2024
(D)
1.4(D)
B1
So that's where we are. We'll have more to report tomorrow."
3824,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, October 25, 2009 12:11 PM
RE: More When We Speak"
3826,"Dear Hillary,
Best wishes to you and your family for a wonderful holiday season.
It has been an honor and a pleasure working for you this year, and I am eagerly looking forward to the challenges of
2010.
Warm personal regards,
Bob Hormats"
3828,Pls see note from rich.
3830,"Oscar, these are the briefings we just completed for her pakistani media interviews tomorrow. Can you print ?"
3831,I worked with Huma and the notes have been placed in the mail system at State. Merry Christmas!
3832,"Cc: Oscar Flores
Importance: High
Attached is the joint statement on the US-Russian Commission that just went out. Bill Burns and Jake cleared it but
wanted it sent to you as an fyi as well.
Oscar can u print as well"
3833,Fyi
3834,We are reaching out.
3837,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, December 24, 2009 2:52 PM
RE:
B6
Excellent. Yesterday was a madhouse but got a lot accomplished."
3839,"Maggie:
will call you.
Political - Philippe is supposed to be preparing a end of year document - both accomplishments and how to get
it in the narrative before mid-Dec when retrospectives start in earnest.
Foreign Policy - we have a tenative list from Michael Fuchs i will email to you - it still needs work. We did not
discuss 21st century and beyond so that frame still needs to be established
Look forward to bureaucracy movement follow-up discussion - also need to download on related challenges
that should be in the mix as we think about how to leverage the building for her needs and keep the building and
her connected, even as she travels.
I read Send - can bring my copy for HRC if she needs one.
cdm
On Sun, Nov 29, 2009 at 12:47 PM, <williamsbarrett wrote:
Very brief notes from a conversation I had with the SOS today - can follow up with you Cheryl when you have a moment
next week
Needed Roadmaps for:
Political
the narrative and how to make the narrative real
Foreign Policy Wins/Successes
Traditional
21st Century and beyond
Bureaucracy Movement
What Plausibly Can be Done Now
Identify - Key direction-setting goals and make plan and timetable to reach
Book re: E-Mail
Send
by David Shipley"
3840,"A very Merry Christmas and a rewarding new year.
It's been a hard but impressive year. Hope you are able to get a break to recharge for the next.
Best. Sandy
This is written from my BlackBerry."
3841,No just a night. Coming back tomorro
3842,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, November 28, 2009 5:14 PM
H
Fw: Quint fms
I'm going to
propose separate bilats with relevant countries. You ok with proceeding that way?"
3844,Fyi and happy christmas
3845,"Jonathan Powell tells me that remarks about Tony would be appreciated but that what would really be significant will be
your conversation with Merkel. Sid"
3846,"Strobe Talbott
Friday, December 25, 2009 9:13 AM
Abedin, Huma; Mills, Cheryl D;
H2; H
RE: message from India -- and from down the street
Thanks, Huma. Albest. S."
3847,"Goosby if the Newsweek report is accurate, who looks the other way as Uganda enacts a
draconian law to imprison or even execute its LGBT citizens.
Fyi
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
3848,"sbwhoeop
Saturday, December 26, 2009 5:52 PM
fyi... who's on first? Sid
H: In case you haven't seen the Wash Post piece today, here is Pat Lang's brief commentary and then below that
the piece itself. Sid
Men on Horseback
1;
1 e NSC's strategic guidance, a classified document that outlines the president's new approach, was described by the
senior administration official as limiting military operations ""in scale and scope to the minimum required to achieve two
goals -- to prevent al-Qaeda safe havens and to prevent the Taliban from toppling the government."" The use of resource-
intensive counterinsurgency tactics -- employing U.S. forces to protect Afghan civilians from the Taliban -- is supposed to
be restricted to key cities and towns in southern and eastern parts of the country, the official said.
""The strategy has fundamentally changed. This is not a COIN strategy,"" Vice President Biden said on MSNBC last week,
using the military's shorthand for counterinsurgency. ""This is not 'go out and occupy the whole country.' "" "" Washbost
It appears that the Afghan policy war is not over. Chandrasekaran is a good reporter but not good enough to get this
unaided. Soo°, someone(s) at the NSC briefed him so that the message would be delivered to the ""other team"" that their
behavior is being watched closely and that the NSC team is prepared to use the public media as a weapon if need be.
The reporter then went to the Defense Department where he was told their side of the story. Secretary Gates appears to
have become the leader of the pentagon faction
Petraeus is interestingly absent from this nearly open struggle. He will wait to see what the outcome may be.
A major confrontation over policy and presidential authority is coming. The policy review scheduled for July 2010 may
well precipitate it. pl
26 December 2009 in Afahanistan, gpvernment, Policy, Pali .s perm.aiin4c
Civilian, military planners have different views on new
approach to Afghanistan
By Rajiv Chandrasekaran
Washington Post Staff Writer
Saturday, December 26, 2009; A01
Two days before announcing the deployment of additional U.S. troops to 8fg,rianistan, President Obama informed Gen.
Stanley A. McChrystal that he was not granting McChrystal's request to double the size of the Afghan army and police.
Cost was a factor, as were questions about whether the capacity exists to train 400,000 personnel. The president told
McChrystal, the top commander of U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan, to focus for now on fielding a little more than
half that number by next October.
Ten days after Obama's speech, the U.S. command responsible for training the Afghans circulated a chart detailing the
combined personnel targets for the army and police. McChrystal's goal of 400,000 remained unchanged.
""It's an open issue,"" a senior Pentagon official said last week.
Nearly a month after Obama unveiled his revised Afghanistan strategy, military and civilian leaders have come away with
differing views of several fundamental aspects of the president's new approach, according to more than a dozen senior
administration and military officials involved in Afghanistan policy, all of whom spoke on the condition of anonymity to
discuss internal deliberations.
Members of Obama's war cabinet disagree over the meaning of his pledge to begin drawing down forces in July 2011 and
whether the mission has been narrowed from a proposal advanced by McChrystal in his August assessment of the war.
The disagreements have opened a fault line between a desire for an early exit among several senior officials at the White
House and a conviction among military commanders that victory is still achievable on their terms.
The differences are complicating implementation of the new strategy. Some officers have responded to the July 2011 date
by seeking to accelerate the pace of operations, instead of narrowing them. At the White House, a senior administration
official said, the National Security Council is discussing ways to increase monitoring of military and State Department
activities in Afghanistan to prevent ""overreaching.""
The NSC's strategic guidance, a classified document that outlines the president's new approach, was described by the
senior administration official as limiting military operations ""in scale and scope to the minimum required to achieve two
goals -- to prevent ai-Qaeda safe havens and to prevent the Taliban from toppling the government."" The use of resource-
intensive counterinsurgency tactics -- employing U.S. forces to protect Afghan civilians from the Taliban -- is supposed to
be restricted to key cities and towns in southern and eastern parts of the country, the official said.
""The strategy has fundamentally changed. This is not a COIN strategy,"" Vice President Biden said on MSNBC last week,
using the military's shorthand for counterinsurgency. ""This is not 'go out and occupy the whole country.' ""
Setting limits
During a videoconference two days before the speech, Obama made it clear to McChristal and U.S. Ambassador Karl W.
Eikenberry that he did not want the additional troops to fuel a broader mission. Speaking to both men from the White
House Situation Room, the president told them not to deploy the forces to areas they would not be able to transfer to
Afghan security forces by July 2011, according to two senior officials with knowledge of the conversation.
Obama's essential instruction was, according to one of the officials, ""Don't bite off more than you can chew.""
White House officials said the president opposes using the forces he has authorized to duplicate an expansive, iraq-style
counterinsurgency operation -- in part because he questions whether it will be possible to achieve a similar outcome in
Afghanistan, which is less developed, and because he wants to start reducing troops in 18 months. The White House's
desired end state in Afghanistan, officials said, envisions more informal local security arrangements than in Iraq, a less-
capable national government and a greater tolerance of insurgent violence.
Senior military officials still think they can achieve a better outcome than envisaged by civilian skeptics in the
administration by using the new forces to mount more comprehensive counterinsurgency operations. Although Pentagon
strategists and McChrystal's advisers in Kabul are looking at how they can fulfill the White House desire for a less
extensive mission, military officials said they are reluctant to strip too much away and weaken an approach that has come
to be revered within the ranks as the only way to suppress guerrilla movements.
Military officials contend that McChrystal does not harbor expansionist aims. They note that he has begun removing
troops from remote mountain valleys and concentrating resources on a modest number of key population centers. But the
approach in those areas will involve counterinsurgency tactics: Troops will focus on restoring normal patterns of life by
trying to keep the Taliban at bay, helping the Afghan government provide basic services to the population and training
local security forces.
McChrystal's plan, the senior Pentagon official said, ""is still counterinsurgency, regardless of the various agendas people
are trying to spin.""
Dissent over drawdown
During strategy discussions at the White House, differences between the White House and the military came into sharp
relief over °baffle's decision to announce his intention to begin drawing down troops in July 2011.
McChrystal argued against it, according to three officials familiar with the process. The head of the U.S. Central
Command, Gen. David H. Petraeus, also expressed concerns. Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates urged Obama to
make the drawdoWn ""conditions-based.""
""There was a lot of push back"" from the Defense Department, one of the officials said.
The president received cover from one uniformed general at the table, James E. Cartwright, the vice chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. Cartwright had adopted a more skeptical view of the mission than many of his military colleagues, one that
resonated with Obama and Biden.
Cartwright effectively endorsed the July 2011 date, arguing that increasing forces and engaging in limited
counterinsurgency made sense, the senior administration official said, ""but given the risk factors -- Pakistan, the Karzai
government, the whole notion of sub-national governance and our track record with the [Afghan security forces], which is
not prestigious -- that it made sense to demonstrate that we could actually do this.""
It. also helped Obama that the principal troop-increase proposal being discussed at the time -- a recommendation that
McChrystal receive 30,000 forces for 18 to 24 months -- had been developed by Gates. The Defense Department
paperwork detailing the proposal identified the increase as starting in the summer of 2009, when the first troops deployed
by the president this year began conducting operations in Afghanistan, but it did not specify an end date.
""Rather than leaving this indefinite and hypothetical, the president's intervention was to say, 'Okay, if we're starting in July
of '09, then we're really talking about July of '11,"" said the senior administration official who described the NSC guidance.
Obama eventually told his war cabinet that he would announce the July 2011 deadline but that the pace of withdrawals
would be determined, as Gates had sought, by conditions on the ground. Obama said he would conduct a thorough
review of progress in a year's time. Although he did not endorse McChrystal's request to increase the Afghan security
forces to 400,000, he said he would reevaluate the issue once the 2010 goal of training 230,000 forces is achieved.
The president avoided details in his Dec. 1 address, leaving it up to members of his Cabinet and to his advisers to explain
the specifics. The result has been a wide divergence of expectations. Gates, appearing on NBC's ""Meet the Press"" the
Sunday after the speech, said that perhaps only ""some handful or some small number"" would be withdrawn. Biden, during
his MSNBC appearance last week, said a chart showing an increase in U.S. deployments this year would be ""coming
down as rapidly over the next two years.""
The ambiguity over the meaning of the July 2011 deadline has generated uncertainty over the presidents intent. ""Is the
surge a way of helping us leave more quickly, or is the timeline a way to help win support for the surge?"" asked a senior
Democratic staff member in Congress. ""Which is the strategy and which is the head-fake? Nobody knows.""
One senior military officer in Afghanistan said he and his fellow soldiers ""don't know if this is all over in 18 months, or
whether this is just a progress report that leads to minor changes.""
""Until they tell us otherwise,"" the officer said, ""we're operating as if the latter is the policy.""
A 'dramatic change'?
Although senior-level civilians in the administration emerged from the review process thinking the mission had been
circumscribed, senior military officials continue to have a different view. The result, as they see it, is that the White House
has embraced McChrystal's original plan.
""We had already been pretty focused that we wouldn't try to clear and hold things more than we needed to,"" said a senior
commander involved in the war. ""It wasn't a dramatic change by any means.""
White House officials have cited a meeting among NSC staff members and McChrystal in which the general displayed a
slide stating that his mission was to ""Defeat the Taliban,"" which some civilians deemed overly ambitious because it
suggested that every last member of the Taliban would have to be killed or captured. The officials said the mission was
redefined to avoid the term.
But to military officers, defeat ""doesn't mean wipe everyone out,"" the commander said. ""It means after Waterloo,
Napoleon still had an army but he wasn't going to threaten Europe. We used that view when we worked defeat.""
Even before the White House review had finished, the commander in charge of day-to-day operations, Lt. Gen. David M.
Rodriguez, had developed a plan to concentrate U.S. and NATO efforts in 80 of the country's nearly 400 districts.
""They're taking credit for some of the things that McChrystal was already doing and calling it a narrowed focus,"" a senior
military official said.
White House advisers maintain that the review process did refine the mission beyond what McChrystal had proposed over
the summer.
""There was a real narrowing here,"" the senior administration official said. ""Stan has a big leadership task to adapt his
original concept to the new strategic guidance.""
The official said NSC officials recognize it will take time for the new orders to filter through the ranks. ""This doesn't turn
around with a speech,"" the official said. ""But I hope we don't see slides a month from now that continue to state that our
goal is 400,000"" Afghan security forces.
The challenge, said that official and another senior administration official, is to recalibrate military operations over the next
18 months in accordance with the new goal.
""The guidance they have is that we're not doing everything, and we're not doing it forever,"" the second official said. ""The
hardest intellectual exercise will be settling on how much is enough.""
For now, however, top military officers speak more expansively than White House advisers.
""Winning means we hand off to a security force that can secure the country,"" the senior Pentagon official said. ""We've
separated the enemy, we've connected the people to the government, and we're helping them to rebuild their economy.
It's at that point that we begin to transition it over to them.""
Terms such as ""winning"" and ""victory"" have been eschewed by the White House. Obama did not use either in his Dec. 1
address, and he said in an interview earlier this year that he was uncomfortable using the term ""victory"" when fighting ""a
non-state actor, a shadowy operation like al-Qaeda.""
But when Gates visited Kabul a week after Obama's speech, he made a point of telling military personnel there that ""we
are in this thing to win.""
""From a moral perspective, when you ask soldiers and families to sacrifice, we do that to win,"" the Pentagon official said.
""We need to be able to articulate winning."""
3849,Agree and he speaks fluent English so no translation needed.
3850,Fyi
3851,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, December 25, 2009 10:41 PM
H
Re: Happy Holidays!
Cdm"
3852,Yes - calling now.
3853,"Yes, vali is working on an answer sheet for some of the tough q and a like blackwater, drones, quetta shura and nuclear
security. You will have tonite or tomorrow am."
3855,fyi
3857,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, December 26, 2009 2:28 PM
Re: (Reuters) Taliban Planned to Use Americans In Pakistan Attacks"
3858,"Fyi for you - jack and I discussed approach.
Cdm"
3859,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, November 29, 2009 10 58 AM
H
Another memo on backdrop to this week. Sid
hrc memo backdrop 112909.docx
November 29, 2009
For: Hillary"
3860,"8:10 am ARRIVE State Department
8:15 am WORKING BREAKFAST FOR INVITED MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
9:15 am James Monroe Room, 8th Floor
9:15 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
9:25 am Secretary's Office
9:30 am PHOTOS w/AMBASSADORIAL SEMINAR
9:45 am Treaty Room, 7th Floor
9:50 am DROP BY w/DS STEINBERG AND GREEK ALTERNATE F.M.
10:00 am DIMITRIOS DROUTSAS Secy's Office *Official photo in anteroom preceding.
10:10 am DEPART State Department *En route Virginia
10:30 am ARRIVE Virginia
10:30 am PRIVATE MEETING
12:30 pm Location: Virginia
12:35 pm DEPART Virginia
12:55 pm ARRIVE State Department
I :00pm OFFICE TIME
2:00pm Secretary's Office
2:00pm SECURE CALL w/ISRAELI PM BINYAMIN NETANYAHU
2:15pm Secretary's Office
2:30pm PHONE CALL w/ISRAELI DEFENSE MINISTER EHUD BARAK
2:45pm Secretary's Office
2:45 pm OFFICE TIME
3:30 pm Secretary's Office
3:30 pm BILATERAL w/I1RAQI VP DR. TARIQ Al-HASHIMI
4:00 pm Secretary's Conference Room *Camera Spray in Treaty Room preceding.
4:00 pm OFFICE TIME
4:45 pm Secretary's Office
4:45 pm THANK YOU TO TEAM COPENHAGEN
5:05 pm Treaty Room
5:15 pm MEETING w/JIM STEINBERG AND PHIL GORDON
5:45 pm Secretary's Office
6:00 pm DEPART State Department *En route Private Residence
6:10 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
#1
,1#"
3861,Per request b/I
3862,"Murtha back in the hospital
By: David Rogers
February 2,2010 10:43 AM EST
Pennsylvania Rep. John Murtha was back in the hospital Tuesday after undergoing gall bladder
surgery last week.
The Virginia Hospital Center in Arlington said that the 77-year-old Democrat was a patient in its
intensive care unit but referred all questions about his condition to his family.
Murtha's congressional office confirmed that he underwent scheduled laparoscopic surgery to remove
his gallbladder at Bethesda Naval Hospital last week. But the congressman's spokesman refused
comment on the seriousness of his condition or any complication that required hospitalization.
A powerhouse in the House Appropriations Committee and close friend of Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-
Calif.), Murtha was hospitalized for a period in December as well when he suffered an infection in his
gall bladder.
The doctors then decided that it should be removed once the infection had been tempered, and that
set up the surgery last week at Bethesda.
In the interim, Murtha has been back in the Capitol, and in his style, came back from the hospital—
with IV bandages still on him— to oversee passage of his defense appropriations bill."
3863,FYI.
3864,"Out on official travel until late in the afternoon of Thursday Oct 22, 2009."
3865,"We did
Huma Abedin
Tuesday, December 29, 2009 10:58 AM
H; 'ValmoroLJ@state.gov'
Re: American Friends of the Hebrew University Scopus Award Dinner - March 11, 2010"
3866,Just faxed it to you. Let me know if you didn't get it. Thanks.
3867,Revised draft of prayer breakfast remarks coming in 15 min by fax.
3868,"H; cheryl.mills
Crowley, Philip J; preines
RE: WPost editorial
; Sullivan, Jacob J
We will draft a response and get it to you. We are also compiling other commentary -- most of which has been very
favorable. In a series of meetings we have had with the democracy and human rights groups, the response has been
overwhelmingly positive."
3870,"RCH came to agree with Frank R. over the weekend that we should hold off on a call by you. I am sitting down with Paul
in a bit and will provide a further update."
3871,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov>
Monday, December 28, 2009 2:09 PM
RE: Karzai call?
B5
Just talked to Holbrooke on the slopes of Telluride.
Karzai is preparing to announce his intention to proceed with the election on schedule. He has lined up Qanooni in
support.
SRAP is preparing a memo of potential options for how to move forward on this. When we have the memo I will be sure
to get it to you pronto.
If Paul has anything to add/amend, I will be sure to let you know."
3872,"RELEASE IN PART
B6"
3874,Will call at six - still doing email
3875,"Dan Schwerin can help with the drafting if you put
together some building blocks. Pi
B5"
3876,"I am sure you saw but can't resist sending ...
Yellow highlights are mine
cdm"
3878,"Good to know
thanks"
3879,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.goy>
Monday, December 28, 2009 5:15 PM
Mills, Cheryl D; H
Re:
B6
Thx"
3882,fyi
3884,FYI
3885,"Yes, I sent Terry an email and he said he understood the regret, all is good."
3888,"Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.gov>
Tuesday, December 29, 2009 11:06 AM
RE: Call list"
3889,Will do. Thanks
3890,"Robinson can talk at 4pm today
Do u want to confirm?
III get you revised paper"
3891,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, November 29, 2009 11:51 AM
H
Re: Another memo on backdrop to this week. Sid
It's there, just scroll down
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
3892,See final b/I -
3893,Yep. I can't warrant the quality of the outline but I've reserved time this week to plug away on it.
3894,We can reach out to see if he can come in the afternoon.
3895,All set -- Singapore Minister will be at 4:30pm.
3896,Revised human rights draft is being faxed to you in Chappaqua. You should have it in the next few minutes.
3897,"Philippe and Jake asked me to send along this response to the Washington Post editorial:
By Michael Posner
The Post's Dec. 27 editorial (""Redefining Human Rights"") on the Obama Administration's human rights and
democracy policies, and Secretary Clinton's recent speech at Georgetown in particular, misses the critical point:
human rights, democracy, and development are mutually reinforcing, not competing goals. They complement
each other in the task of making human rights a human reality.
President Roosevelt understood the fundamental link between liberty, prosperity and security, tying together
freedom of speech and worship with freedom from want and freedom from fear in his famous ""Four Freedoms""
speech. At Georgetown, Secretary Clinton articulated a 21st century vision grounded in this wisdom.
To accuse Secretary Clinton of embracing a Soviet-bloc approach to human rights because she includes
development in a discussion of democracy not only strains the bonds of credulity and common sense, it also
walls off a crucial avenue for ensuring that people can actually exercise the rights that are naturally theirs -
including the rights to freedom of religion, association, and speech-in their daily lives.
As Secretary Clinton made clear, policies that address development alone are not adequate: ""Freedom doesn't
come in half measures, and partial remedies will not solve the whole problem,"" she said. But experience shows
us that where broad-based development occurs, people are more likely to demand a say in securing their futures,
and governments are more likely to have the resources to maintain the strong institutions, including reliable
police and fair courts, that help ensure the consistent protection of rights. Where people are given the right to
speak freely, to participate in their nation's political process and have access to basic information about
government, sustainable development is more likely to occur. At the same time, democracies without
development do not last. These are mutually reinforcing tracks, and the Obama Administration is committed to
pursuing both simultaneously.
As President Obama said in his Nobel lecture, ""engagement with repressive regimes lacks the satisfying purity
of indignation."" But the Post's overheated outrage ignores the lessons learned by generations of men and women
who worked to advance human rights around the world.
To suggest that Secretary Clinton somehow provided excuses to rights-abusing dictators in a speech in which
she forcefully criticized specific abuses across the world, is simply not credible. Far from being an excuse for
any regime, this is an approach that pushes governments to do more to advance civil and political rights and to
ensure that democracy actually delivers a measure of prosperity and opportunity for all. That is the right
approach for the Obama Administration and for the 21st century.
###"
3898,Great. We're reaching out to them now.
3899,This is the close to final that will go in Posner's rather than your name.
3900,"B6
Call me on"
3901,ok
3903,Y
3904,"H RC:
This is an early preview of the speech (which is still in progress).
Let me know what you think conceptually after you read.
Cdm
VETTERS: PLEASE INITIAL HERE"
3905,"Folks,
I've attached the latest draft of the Internet freedom speech. It should be ready for the Secretary. This version addresses
issues raised in the last draft with three exceptions:
Please let me know if any of you have further questions or comments.
Thanks,
Tomicah"
3907,"HRC:
Attached and below is the concept for a technology dinner that would lead up to speech.
Concept Paper for Dinner on Connection Technologies
Potential Invitees:
1) Padmasree Warrior, CISCO
2) Carol Bartz, Yahoo!
3) John Thompson, Symantec
4) Pierre Omidayr, Ebay and Omidyar Networks
5) Anthony Jiminez, MicroTech
6) Luis Ubinas, Ford Foundation
7) Julius Genachowski, Chairman FCC
8) Craig Mundie or Steve Ballmer, Microsoft
9) Steve Jobs, Apple
10) Michael Joseph, Safaricom and M-Pesa
11) Ory Okolloh, Ushahidi
12) Jack Dorsey, Twitter/Square
13) Eric Schmidt, Google
14) James Eberhard, Mobile Accord
15) Jason Liebman, Howcast
16) Carlos Slim, MexTel or Mo Ibrahim, former CelTel and now Mo Ibrahim
Foundation
17) Clay Shirky, NYU
18) Andrew Rasiej, TechPresident
19) Jonathan Zittrain, Harvard"
3908,"French.docx; Final Communique Portuguese.docx;
FinalCommuniqueCreole_Revision.docx
Fyi"
3909,Good - you good for us to sign off on giving a speech on 21 jan at newseum?
3910,Apparently - will find out what.
3911,"I am on travel and will not return to the office until Monday, January 4, 2010. I will be reviewing e-mail intermittently. If
you need immediate assistance contact Marisa McAuliffe by phone at 202-647-2972 or email at mcauliffems@state.gov."
3913,FYI — for you in your new tech role.
3915,"B6
FYI"
3916,"Delivery has failed to these recipients or distribution lists:
mhcalejaftstate.gov
The recipient's e-mail address was not found in the recipient's e-mail system. Microsoft Exchange will not try to redeliver
this message for you. Please check the e-mail address and try resending this message, or provide the following diagnostic
text to your system administrator.
Diagnostic information for administrators:
Generating server: MSWASHDCIB03.washdc.state.sbu
mhcaleja@state.gov
it< #5.1.1> #SMTP#
Original message headers:
Received: from vance2.state.gov ([10.4.16.238]) by
MSWASHDCIB03.washdc.state.sbu with Microsoft SMTPSVC(6.0.3790,3959); Sun, 3
Jan 2010 18:36:58 -0500
Received: from mail.clintonemail.com (ool-i8bbeabb.static.opton1ine.net [24.187.234.187])
by vance2.state.gov with ESMTP id o03NBEEh019168
for (mhcaleja@state.gov>; Sun, 3 Jan 2010 18:11:14 -0500
Received: from CLNTINET08.clinton.local ([fe80::dObb:23d3:f75e:4993]) by
CLNTINET08.clinton.local ([fe80::d0bb:23d3:f75e:4993t10]) with mapi; Sun, 3
Jan 2010 18:36:56 -0500"
3917,"First we are hearing of uruguay, just checked the year end requests from travel and its not in there. We will find out.
As for communities of democracies, building and bureau very much aware you committed to going. We just need to
work with them through dates etc."
3918,Fyi
3919,Inauguration for president mujica of uruguay is March 1st.
3920,"10:30 Lithuanian FM Azubalis (you will have call sheet soon)
10:45 Secretary Gates
11am Tony Blair
11:30 Conference Call on doha speech (also sending paper for you to see before that call)"
3921,Will call in 10 mins -- getting into work.
3922,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA©state.gov>
Thursday, February 11, 2010 9:42 AM
Sullivan, Jacob .J
A few more words on the Dalai Lama
I never heard the earlier part of this debate
We shd not use our meeting w/ the DL to beat them up, but treat it like we would treat a meeting with a Coptic leader
from Egypt or a Bahai leader from Iran, etc. We have nothing to hide. Let the Chinese make a big issue out of it if they
want to; we will just do what we have always done.
AM"
3923,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Thursday, February 11,2010 10:04 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
One more thought on OAS
One last thought I had is whether it would be worth
AM"
3924,"I just asked Ops if we might be able to talk for a minute before your 10:45 call with Sec Gates. The call is on a different
subject, but the Yemen 1206 package may come up and I wanted to brief you where things stand as of this morning. It
was on his desk for signature yesterday and I asked that it be pulled back so we could work through some last issues
today. I was planning to touch base with you before signing off. Thanks."
3925,"Yes, we have the video on the list to do by early March."
3926,Fyi
3928,"Yes on lithuania video
We will try on moving dates but we have been aware they are set for the 9-11th Will start working on it."
3931,I see I'm not the only person who does email while on the phone! ;-)
3932,fyi
3933,For printing for HRC.
3936,"Blair's guy said you ok'ed releasing today. If so, we'll pull the trigger. It is pasted below:
Statement by the Secretary
This Administration has, from the beginning, worked to bring about comprehensive peace in the Middle East, including a
two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. On that issue our approach has been three-fold: (1) to help build the
economy and capacity to govern of a Palestinian state; (2) to renew political negotiations to enable the earliest possible
establishment of that state; and (3) to achieve these in a manner that ensures the security of Israel and of the
Palestinians.
Consistent with Prime Minister Fayyad's plan for a future Palestinian state, Tony Blair, as the Quartet representative, will
intensify his partnership with Senator Mitchell in support of the political negotiations. In his role as Quartet
Representative Tony Blair will continue, with full support by and coordination with Senator Mitchell, to mobilize the
efforts of the international community: (1) to build support for the institutional capacity and governance of a future
Palestinian State, including on the rule of law; (2) to improve freedom of movement and access for Palestinians; (3) to
encourage further private sector investment; and (4) to bring change in the living conditions of the people in Gaza."
3937,"Importance: High
In case cdm didn't share already"
3938,Got it
3939,Fyi
3942,"Please know that you and WJC are in my prayers.
I spoke to Ellen tonight, who is preparing a memo and will have it Monday.
Pasted below is a draft letter that our Ambassador plus French and Russians will be working on tomorrow in Vienna,
ideally to deliver to Amano,"
3943,Fyi
3944,This relates to the letter from yesterday. FYI prior to call with Kouchner.
3945,"See the report below: Pinera has announced his support.
I had a long conversation with Craig a little while ago. He spoke with a number of people in Chile, including his close
friend,
According to Craig, Pinera had made the calculation that it would be politically untenable to dump Insulza. Apparently
there is a coalition leadership in the lower house, and Insulza's party, Concertacion, controls the upper house. So he had
no choice.
That said, Craig believes that his clear message had an impact on what Pinera told Insulza. He apparently gave his
support with two conditions: (1) don't interfere in Chilean politics, and (2) take the democratization agenda seriously
and don't carry the ALBA countries' water.
Craig also said that Arturo had been effective in making clear that the jury was out on Insulza in Washington -- that had
an impact on the Pinera government and reinforced their second message to him.
Bottom line: Craig said we couldn't have talked Pinera off of this, but we helped drive a stronger set of conditions on
Pinera's support."
3946,"I will be traveling today, February 11, returning late Sunday, February 14, with intermittent access to my email. If you
need to reach me urgently please contact Nora Toiv, Toivnf@state.gov, 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych,
laszczychj@state.gov, 202-647-5548.
Thank you!"
3947,"February 12, 2010
For: Hillary"
3949,J - can u print for hrc? Latest version of doha speech. I'm sure others will have edits but wanted her to have copy now.
3951,"I have been working harrd - ertharin has been running my ass around. We starting our meetings at 930am after landing
at 830am and we are now just getting down with her dinner party for 40 for Haiti (with ag minister and haiti ambo).
Wouldn't you know it - it snowed for the first time in decades in Rome.
Conf went well - am now hoping tomorrow to shop!
Thank you for the well wishes.
Safe travels."
3952,"Jake just downloaded with me from your conversation w/ him yesterday re the Interim Report. I just want to reassure
you that I get it completely; you saw a much earlier draft than I would have liked. I'll be working on it all weekend and
we'll make you proud. Have a good trip -- I used to be on the board of thr US-Islamic World Forum and went a couple of
times. AM"
3953,Ok
3954,That's great news! See you tomorrow. I will have a long list to share...
3955,"I'm sorry I was not able to join last week's meeting on Haiti but I have calls into Anne Marie and Arturo to get an update.
Once I get a better understanding of how we plan to move forward on a regional basis we will work on putting together
a comprehensive PD strategy to support our efforts
If you like the idea I can begin to trial balloon it with media execs in US and LA that I know
personally to gauge their reaction.
Of course we can't rely on a psa campaign alone to sustain the effort so we will develop other PD strategies for
engagement throughout the region which I will forward as they evolve.
Let me know what you think. In the meantime I thought you might be interested in the report below (copy attached as
well) which outlines the results to date of our global media outreach initiative.
Successfully Engaging Global Media
About the U.S. Role and International Cooperation in Haiti
Examples of Post Efforts to Date
EUROPE
• Reinforcing the Secretary's message, U.S. Ambassador to France Rivkin engaged directly
with over 100 journalists in an event streamed live on-line by CNN, where he highlighted
U.S. assistance to Haiti and the cooperation of the US with France, the UN and the
international community. Embassy Paris also reached out to senior officials in the Elysee,
MFA, French media and civil society at all levels to underscore the message of positive
coordination with our French partners and to set the record straight on the work of the USG
in Haiti. As a result, leading French officials dismissed rumors of rising diplomatic tensions
between the two countries. Leading officials consistently praised the work of the Obama
administration in Haiti and the need for a strong US role in the emergency response.
• Embassy London's media blitz featured Ambassador Susman, who underlined the U.S.
commitment to Haiti at an Embassy Martin Luther King Jr. holiday event with actor James
Earl Jones; the event was covered by BBC World News (audience 270 million worldwide)
and various U.K. papers. The Ambassador and the JO also spoke about Haiti on January 20-
22 on BBC TV 2's ""Daily Politics Show,"" BBC Radio, the BBC TV Evening News, and
other media and helped embed an ITV journalist on the USNS Comfort to help balance ITV's
previously negative reporting and reached out personally to BBC producers to call attention
to inaccurate reporting alleging that the U.S. military prevented Medicins Sans Frontiers
from delivering aid and supplies to the airport in Port Au Prince.
• With media coverage growing more critical, U.S. Ambassador to Greece Speckhard gave an
interview to Ta Nea newspaper and DCM Deborah McCarthy, who previously served in
Haiti, was interviewed by Real Sunday newspaper, resulting in positive stories about U.S.
assistance to Haiti. Meanwhile, the PAO spoke with the Director of Elefterotypia, whose
paper has run some of the most misdirected coverage of Haiti, and received a commitment to
run an Embassy-produced story to counteract the misinformation.
AFRICA
• Four African posts — Senegal, Ghana, Nigeria and Tanzania — organized highly successful
outreach programs based on the diversion of the USS Gunston Hall to Haiti. The ship, with
African officers aboard, was headed to western Africa under AFRICOM' s African
Partnership Station maritime security training program when it was diverted to provide relief
to Haiti. With African officers working alongside U.S. military officers to deliver assistance
to Haitians, PAOs at those posts connected local reporters with the ship to conduct live
interviews of the Africans for their home media, resulting in excellent media placement in all
four countries.
• On January 20 U.S. Ambassador to South Africa Gips gave a 10-minute live interview on
Haiti with 5FM, a leading youth station with listenership of approx 800,000. The
Ambassador highlighted the depth and breadth of US support and congratulated South Africa
for sending emergency teams. The radio hosts told the Embassy afterward that e-mails and
SMS messages were pouring into the station in support of U.S. efforts. Ambassador Gips
reached out to additional audiences via broadcast media on January 21 and recorded a
program via the Africa Regional Media Hub with SABC-International TV's ""Rendezvous
Africa"" program (broadcast across the continent) and live interviews with drive-time radio
programs on two national stations.
• As a result of a press conference hosted by the Embassy on January 22, all major Angolan
media gave positive coverage to U.S. efforts in Haiti, including Radio Nacional de Angola
and the Jornal de Angola newspaper, which ran an editorial January 23 that stated: ""We need
to believe and let those on the ground do their work because the old tactics of criticizing who
is doing something for the Haitian People just for the sake of criticizing at a moment like this
is not acceptable. . . Just see the numbers of daily flights that arrive in Haiti to have an idea
and quickly come to the conclusion that the possible failures and omissions do not supersede
the positive and timely work done by the entities undertaking the relief efforts in Haiti.""
EAST ASIA-PACIFIC
• The U.S. Ambassador to Indonesia's January 21 byliner on Haiti ran as the lead item on the
editorial page of Sep utar Indonesia daily, and it was subsequently picked up by Antara, the
Indonesian national news agency, and subsequently appeared in most Indonesian media.
• South Korea: Looking to help Korean audiences connect with the situation in Haiti, PA
Seoul arranged a Digital Video Conference with the U.S. Consul in Nagoya, Japan, who had
previously served as Information Officer in Port-au-Prince and was a fluent Korean
speaker. CG Kwak underlined the long tradition of US humanitarian assistance to Haiti as
well as the massive US response to the current crisis and noted Korea's own active
involvement in the relief work. The U.S. Ambassador's blog on January 22, dedicated to the
earthquake and those affected by it, received more than 1,500 hits in three days, with almost
all comments supporting U.S. concerns.
The EAP Regional Media Hub in Tokyo hosted a journalists' roundtable with Gordon Duguid
in Haiti on January 25 that included journalists from Hong Kong's Ming Pao newspaper,
Malaysia's New Straits Times newspaper, BERNAM.A (Malaysian National News Agency),
and Australia's Canberra Times newspaper and Radio 6PR (Perth), and resulted in favorable
stories appearing over the next few days in all participating media.
NEAR EAST
• Lebanon: Television station Al-Jadid is not Hezbollah-affiliated, with most of its funding
coming from the Gulf and Libya. Their coverage is also routinely sensationalistic and
mirrored Al-Manar's coverage. PAS Beirut clarified aspects of USG assistance in Haiti to
Al-Jadid on January 20. On Saturday January 23, Al-Jadid hosted the PAO for 30 minutes
on morning news talk-show al-Hadath to discuss American relief efforts in Haiti. The PAO
was able to address many of the accusations carried in the Al-Manar report, including the
myriad ""weapons testing"" myths being propagated by Russian and Venezuelan media outlets.
[Post cannot engage directly with Hezbollah television station Al-Manar as it was designated
as a Special Designated Global Terrorist organization in 2006 under E.O. 13224]
• Morocco: On 1/28/10 the nationalist French-language daily L 'Opinion published an op-ed
entitled, ""Haiti: After terror, the dread..."" The paper is generally considered to be fairly
hostile to the USG, however, on 1/29/10, PAO Rabat and an FSN went to L 'Opinion to
discuss the op-ed. Post was amazed to find the staff, including the writer himself,
accommodating and even apologetic during the meeting. The editor-in-chief immediately
agreed that the piece had been unfair, and the writer somewhat sheepishly explained himself
by saying that public opinion had not quite recovered from ""the Bush years,"" but readily
acknowledged as well that the article was not balanced. PAO gave the writer a dossier of
Washington File articles and some information from Infocentral's regular updates, which he
promised to use in writing a counterpoint article. On 2/1/10, L 'Opinion published an article
entitled, ""The massive humanitarian action of the United States,"" based on the articles
provided by Post. The excellent article underscored the scope of American assistance, both
government and private sector, to aide Haiti's earthquake victims.
• Syria: Syrian state-run media coverage of the USG role in Haiti relief efforts has been
largely negative and inaccurate, portraying the U.S. military as occupying Haiti. Examples
include the Ba'ath party's Al-Baath newspaper publishing three critical articles (1/21/01)
under the headlines: ""US Crimes in Haiti,"" ""US Military Forces Tighten Grip on Haiti,"" and
""US Forces Stop Humanitarian Planes from Landing."" On 1/25/10, government-owned
Tishreen published an op-ed claiming that the superpowers were rushing towards a military
conquest of Haiti in order to profit from reconstruction operations, which is the new method
of colonialism. On 1/28/10, DAS Maura Connelly met with Syrian Ambassador Mustafa,
who promised to work to halt the negative coverage coming from some Syrian outlets. To
encourage more balanced coverage, Embassy Damascus will host a roundtable 2/3/10 with
-
journalists from government-owned and independent Syrian media. Post also extended a
personal invitation to an advisor of the Minister of Information."
3957,"Thought you might be interested in this piece by Joe Nye which I believe validates the new approach we are trying to
implement. We have begun to roll-out the new plan and so far the reaction has been reasonably positive. We have
organized a set of working groups around key initiatives --- women's empowerment; cve; expanded English language
training; cultural programming; youth; climate change; etc so that we can incorporate new proposals into FY2012
budget and re-direct FY 2010 and 2011 funds wherever possible and appropriate. The working groups are being chaired
by senior level officers from the regional bureaus --- Bob Blake; Craig Kelly, etc. --- and are being asked to report back
within 4 to 6 weeks. I'll continue to keep you posted as things move forward.
The New Public Diplomacy
Joseph S. Nye
2010-02-10
CAMBRIDGE — The world of traditional power politics was typically about whose military or economy would
win. In today's information age, politics is also about whose ""story"" wins.
National narratives are, indeed, a type of currency. Governments compete with each other and with other
organizations to enhance their own credibility and weaken that of their opponents. Witness the contest between
the government and protesters after the Iranian elections in June 2009, in which the Internet and Twitter played
crucial roles, or the recent controversy between Google and China.
Reputation has always mattered in world politics, but credibility has become crucial because of a ""paradox of
plenty."" When information is plentiful, the scarce resource is attention. Under the new conditions, a soft sell
may, more than ever, prove more effective than a hard sell.
For example, the relative independence of the BBC, sometimes a source of consternation to British
governments, has paid rich dividends in credibility, as illustrated by this account of Tanzanian President Jakaya
Kikwete's day: ""he rises at dawn, listens to the BBC World Service, then scans the Tanzanian press.""
Skeptics who treat the term ""public diplomacy"" as a mere euphemism for propaganda miss the point. Simple
propaganda is counterproductive as public diplomacy. Nor is public diplomacy merely a public-relations
campaign. Public diplomacy also involves building long-term relationships that create an enabling environment
for government policies.
The contribution of direct government information to long-term cultural relationships varies with three
dimensions or stages of public diplomacy, and all three are important. The first and most immediate dimension
is daily communications, which involves explaining the context of domestic and foreign-policy decisions. This
dimension also involves preparation for dealing with crises. If there is a vacuum in information after an event,
others will rush in to fill it.
The second dimension is strategic communication, which develops a set of simple themes, much as a political
or advertising campaign does. While the first dimension is measured in hours and days, the second occurs over
weeks, months, and even years.
The third dimension of public diplomacy is the development of lasting relationships with key individuals over
many years or even decades, through scholarships, exchanges, training, seminars, conferences, and access to
media channels. These programs develop what the American journalist Edward R. Murrow once called the
crucial ""last three feet"" — face-to-face communications, with the enhanced credibility that reciprocity creates.
But even the best advertising cannot sell an unpopular product. A communications strategy cannot work if it
cuts against the grain of policy. Actions speak louder than words. All too often, policymakers treat public
diplomacy as a bandage that can be applied after damage is done by other instruments. For example, China tried
to enhance its soft power by successfully staging the 2008 Olympics, but its domestic simultaneous crackdown
in Tibet — and subsequent repression in Xinxiang and arrests of human rights lawyers — undercut its gains.
Great powers try to use culture and narrative to create soft power that promotes their advantage, but they do not
always understand how to do it. Critics in the United States complain that the over-militarization of foreign
policy undercuts its credibility. Instead, they advocate diplomacy ""on steroids,"" staffed by diplomats trained in
new media, cross-cultural communications, granular local knowledge, and networks of contacts with under-
represented groups.
The centralized mass-media approach to public diplomacy still plays an important role. Governments need to
correct daily misrepresentations of their policies, as well as to try to convey a longer-term strategic message.
The main strength of the mass-media approach is its audience reach and ability to generate public awareness
and set the agenda. But its weakness is its inability to influence how the message is perceived in different
cultural settings. The sender knows what she says, but not always what the targets hear. Cultural barriers are apt
to distort what is heard.
Networked communications, on the other hand, can take advantage of two-way communications and peer-to-
peer relations to overcome cultural differences. This type of decentralization and flexibility is difficult for
governments to accomplish, given their central accountability structures.
The greater flexibility of non-governmental organizations in using networks has given rise to what some call
""the new public diplomacy,"" which is no longer confined to messaging, promotion campaigns, or even direct
governmental contacts with foreign publics serving foreign-policy purposes. It is also about building
relationships with civil-society actors in other countries and facilitating networks between non-governmental
parties at home and abroad.
In this approach to public diplomacy, government policy is aimed at promoting and participating in, rather than
controlling, such cross-border networks. Indeed, too much government control, or even the appearance of it, can
undercut the credibility that such networks are designed to engender. The evolution of public diplomacy from
one-way communications to a two-way dialogue treats publics as co-creators of meaning and communication.
Power in a global information age, more than ever, will include a soft dimension of attraction as well as the hard
dimensions of coercion and payment. Combining these dimensions effectively is called ""smart power."" For
-
example, the current struggle against transnational terrorism is a struggle over winning hearts and minds, and
over-reliance on hard power alone is not the path to success.
Public diplomacy is an important tool in the arsenal of smart power, but smart public diplomacy requires an
understanding of credibility, self-criticism, and the role of civil society in generating soft power. If it
degenerates into propaganda, public diplomacy not only fails to convince, but can undercut soft power. Instead,
it must remain a two-way process, because soft power depends, first and foremost, upon understanding the
minds of others."
3958,"Yes. I am in all next week. 191 work with Lona to set up a time to meet.
im"
3959,"Mikulski, BAM (Mikulski) <BAM@Mikulski.senate.gov>
Saturday, February 13, 2010 9:55 AM
H
Re: Thinking
You are desparately needed
$$raisers---- did you know I've hired mandy as my media person— yes up for re elect. I'm going to go again. Like so
many of this want to make this presidency and our country work again.
Sent from my BlackBerry Wireless Handheld"
3960,I am on official travel until mid-day on 2/19. I will check messages by Blackberry as frequently as possible.
3961,"H: FYI. This story headlined the Huffington Post, has more hits and comments than any other piece, and is the number
one story on blogs across the web right now. Paul is a researcher at the Sunlight Foundation. Politico, Wash Post and
NYT have belatedly followed up on Paul's story but lack a lot of his reporting. Sid
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/paul-blumenthal/the-legacy-of-billy-tauzi_b_460358.htmlou
Paul E3lurnenth*i
http://wvvw.huffingtonpost.com/paul-blumenthal/the-legacy-of-billy-tauzi_b_460358.html
Posted: February 12, 2010 01:28 PM
B)0
LIIM7
, 27 It■ IVC
,
•11
e
ty
a ""11......
, ux.straxte rraulaut....r ' a
e house
anrtt i tn.turn scs7.,...—scemaaLean
For more research like this, visit the Sunt,sgPt Fooriciatico's clog.
More than a million spectators gathered before the Capitol on a frosty January afternoon to witness the inauguration of
Barad< Obama, who promised in his campaign to change Washington's mercenary culture of lobbyists, special interest
influence and backroom deals. But within a few months of being sworn in, the President and his top aides were sitting
down with leaders from the pharmaceutical industry to hash out a deal that they thought would make health care reform
possible.
Over the following months, pharmaceutical industry lobbyists and executives met with top White House aides dozens of
times to hammer out a deal that would secure industry support for the administration's health care reform agenda in
exchange for the White House abandoning key elements of the president's promises to reform the pharmaceutical
industry. They flooded Congress with campaign contributions, and hired dozens of former Capitol Hill insiders to push
their case. How they did it--pieced together from news accounts, disclosure forms including lobbying reports and Federal
Election Commission records, White House visitor logs and the sghedu! ..S,:::in. Max,Baucus releases yoiun:tarily--is a
testament to how ingrained the grip of special interests remains in Washington.
In the 2008 campaign, Obama declared his intention to include all stakeholders as he sought to reform the nation's health
care system, but also supported key qemocr.atic health reform uok,
sies. Among these were several that targeted the
pharmaceutical industry: Allowing re-importation of drugs from first world countries with lower drug prices and providing
Medicare with negotiating authority over prescription drug prices in the recently enacted Part D program. These weren't
just promises, Obama had already voted for both of them as a senator in 2007. (Rdl Call Vote 132 and Roll call Vo.t.c.-)
150.)
Set to carry out this agenda were two Capitol Hill veterans, schooled in the monied Washington culture, chief of staff
Rahm Emanuel and deputy chief of staff Jim Messina. Emanuel was a former fundraiser, Clinton administration official,
investment banker and member of the Democratic leadership in Congress. Messina was the former campaign manager
B6
and chief of staff to the powerful Senate Finance Committee chairman Max Baucus. Both were known for their
unparalleled legislative abilities.
Because of Obama's decision to develop a plan operating through the legislative process, members of Congress also
played key roles. Early on, the pharmaceutical companies were told to deal directly with Senate Finance Committee
chairman Max Bpuf.
-4:s. Baucus would be the vehicle for the deal worked out behind the scenes by the White House and
PhRMA.
Central to this effort was PhRMA president, CEO and top lobbyist Billy Tauzin, a longtime Democratic member of
Congress who switched party affiliations after Republicans gained control of Congress in 1994. By switching parties
Tauzin was able to maintain his influence and even rose to be Chairman of the House Committee on Energy &
Commerce. Tauzin became the poster child of Washington's mercenary culture. He crafted a bill to provide prescription
drug access to Medicare recipients, one that provided major concessions to the pharmaceutical industry. Medicare would
not be able to negotiate for lower prescription drug costs and reimportation of drugs from first world countries would not be
allowed. A few months after the bill passed, Tauzin announced that he was retiring from Congress and would be taking a
job helming PhRMA for a salary of $2 million.
Tauzin's job change became fodder for a campaign ad that then presidential candidate Barack Obama ran in the spring of
2008 simply titled "".Biliy."" It featured the candidate, sleeves rolled up, talking to a salon of gasping Americans about the
ways of Washington. ""The pharmaceutical industry wrote into the prescription drug plan that Medicare could not negotiate
with drug companies. And you know what, the chairman of the committee, who pushed the law through, went to work for
the pharmaceutical industry making $2 million a year."" The screen fades to black to inform the viewer that, ""Barack
Obama is the only candidate who refuses Washington lobbyist money,"" while the candidate continues his lecture,
""Imagine that. That's an example of the same old game playing in Washington. You know, I don't want to learn how to
play the game better, I want to put an end to the game playing.""
Aiding PhRMA in their outreach to Congress would be a squadron of lobbyists to push their health care reform priorities.
Over the course of 2009, the drug industry trade group sdeft:tow::!i: _ 520 tniliion on in house and hired lobbyists. Aside from
PhRMA's massive in-house lobbying operation, the trade group hired 48 outside lobbying firms. The total number of
lobbyists working for PhRMA in 2009 reached 165. Some 137 of those 165 lobbyists representing PhRMA were former
employees of either the legislative or executive branches. Of these dozens were former congressional staffers including
two former chiefs of staff to Max Baucus.
According to data compiled by the Center for Responsive Politics, drug makers coptr.ibu■ed sums to ....:ongressional
ecii-om.lttee.s during the same period--from January to the end of October (4thquarter numbers are still being
totaled), industry political action committees, employees and their family members flooded lawmakers with over $8 million.
Those contributions tilted heavily to Democrats over Republicans by a 57 to 42 percent margin--the first time in any
election cycle going back to 1990, the first year that the Center for Responsive Politics began tracking industry giving, that
Democrats were so favored. Given their majorities on Capitol Hill, and the new President's intention to reform America's
health care system, the new tilt was perhaps not surprising.
On March 5, the White House a Tee.tiilfa....ivitfi.rnnic!r_nealth care induLd.er.s to try to bring them to the table and
see what could be done to gain their support. In attendance were Billy Tauzin, president, CEO and top lobbyist for
PhRMA, Pfizer CEO Jeff Kindler, America's Health Care Plans (AHIP) Chairman Karen lgnani, Tom Donohue of the
Chamber of Commerce and Robert Wood Johnson Foundations' Rise Lavizzomourey. A day before the White House
meeting Tauzin 31)12.7.a_f;=■.:4_1
.7...-1 Ci\IF:
.
.lc touting health care reform and promising to work closely with the Obama
administration. In the interview he touted it as an ""optimistic plan"", acknowledging that the industry did have a few
problems but was glad to have a chance to discuss these. Spme were duri?0,7rognnd,,
,td by this apparent change of
heart on behalf of an industry long adverse to health care reforms.
On April 15, Jim Messina and Jon Selib, chief of staff to Senate Finance Committee chairman Max Baucus, convened a
meeting at the headquarters of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee (DSCC) with leaders of organized labor
and health care groups, including PhRMA. At the meeting, the groups decided to form two nonprofit entities to promote
reform efforts, Healthy Economy Now and Americans for Stable Quality Care, that would be almost entftelv funoed pj
.
PhRMA. The two groups spent $24 million on their advertising campaigns; the contract to produce and place ads went to
White House Senior Advisor David AKPD, which owed Axelrod $2 million.
In the next month, CEO's from pharmaceutical companies would meet with Baucus and administration officials at least
four times. These talks preceded a major public event at the White House, one critical to its strategy to promote health
care reform. On May 11, PhRMA and other trade industry groups piedaed cost ,
..-v_itting_measures to the White House that
would save, they claimed, upwards of $2 trillion over the next decade. President Obama announced the deal in the State
Dining Room, flanked by leaders of the various trade groups; the administration followed up with a media blitz in the press
and on the White House Web site.
The next day, Healthy Economy Now's PhRMA funded ad campaign ran their first advertisement in support of the health
care reform process calling for the government to finally ""fix"" the nation's health care cost problems. While many elements
of the $2 trillion cost cutting pledge fell apart, the drug industry remained committed to the process in the hopes that they
could ultimately win out and defeat the provisions they most feared in closed-door meetings with the White House:
The first occurred on June 2. White House visitor logs show PhRMA's top executives, including Tauzin, and industry
CEOs met with Sarah Fenn from the White House Office of Health Care Reform. On the same day, the publicly available
schedule of Senator Max Baucus shows Tauzin and the same industry CEOs met the Senate Finance Committee
chairman. What ultimately resulted from these coordinated meetings would be revealed by Baucus on June 20.
In a press release featuring a statement by Tauzin, Baucus revealed that the pharmaceutical industry had accepted $80
billion in cost cutting measures to be included in the Senate Finance Committee version of the bill. According to news
re_gorts, Baucus initially proposed $100 billion in cost cutting measures, but the executives and lobbyists meeting on June
2 were able to win the lower figure.
The terms of the initial cost-cutting deal included $30 billion go directly towards closing the ""donut hole"" in Medicare
prescription drug coverage. The ""donut hole"" is a term for the gap in coverage that occurs within the Medicare prescription
drug coverage. For those purchasing prescription drugs through the Medicare program coverage cuts off at $2,700 spent
and does not pick back up again until $6,154 is spent by the participant. The amount proposed in the deal; 50 percent
coverage for drugs within the coverage gap, however, would not completely close the ""donut hole.""
In Baucus' press release, Tauzin is quoted as saying, ""This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity and, working together, we
can make this hope for a better tomorrow a reality today."" This ""once-in-a-lifetime"" opportunity also extended to the
pharmaceutical industry's ability to blunt the long-term Democratic agenda of lowering prescription drug prices through
Medicare negotiations, re-importation and quicker release of generics onto the market. After making such a grand
statement of support through cost cutting proposals it was time for the pharmaceutical industry to finally force the White
House and Democrats to take certain chips off the table.
Baucus proceeded with a_pia,n c.c)r
.ivene.a bicartisap rimuo in an effort to craft the bill desired by the White House.
These participants included Democrats Kent Conrad and Jeff Bingaman and Republicans Chuck Grassley, Mike Enzi and
Olympia Snowe. Baucus' decision and the need to solidify deals with groups like the pharmaceutical industry - which were
reliant on Baucus producing a bill - slowed down the legislative process making it impossible for Congress to meet the
White House's announced iltuouet reces§ dee&rie for passing health care reform.
Soon after, PhRMA's big guns and industry lobbyists paid the White House another visit on July 7 and this time met with
Rehm Emanuel and Jim Messina (Baucus' chief of staff Jon Selib is also listed in White House visitor logs for this
meeting). In August, The Huffirytorj. !Dosi',.
--; Ryan Grim reported on an internal memo that was drafted at that meeting that
outlined the policies that would not be allowed into any final version of health care reform. These included Medicare
prescription drug negotiations, drug re-importation, and the lowering of prices for drugs available through Medicare Part D
and Part B. The deal would be $80 billion in cost cutting and absolutely no more.
***
While the $80 billion deal was cut with Baucus' committee, other congressional committees continued to mark-up their
own versions of health care reform without the knowledge that the White House was relying on Baucus to produce the
final product. In the House of Representatives, the House Energy & Commerce Committee leveled a direct threat to the
$80 billion deal. Energy & Commerce Chair Henry Waxman sought to include all of the provisions that PhRMA had gotten
the White House and Baucus to cut out of the reform bill. These included drug reimportation. Medicare negotiating power
and speedier release of generics to the market. According to previous analysis of the measures proposed by the
committee, these measures would have totaled hundreds of billions in cost cuts, far exceeding the $80 billion cap agreed
to by the White House, Baucus and PhRMA.
The cost cutting measures passed in the Energy & Commerce bill spooked the board of PhRMA, which included all of the
CEOs involved in the deal-cutting meetings with the White House and Baucus. The board pressured Tauzin to go public
with the deal to ensure that the White House would recognize it and not renege. On August 4, the Los Ancg•3les•Firrief-
,
-
:, in
an exclusive report, featured quotes from Tauzin claiming that a deal between the White House and PhRMA existed and
that, as Tauzin put it, ""The White House blessed it."" Tom Hamburger wrote in the article, ""For his part, Tauzin said he had
not only received the White House pledge to forswear Medicare drug price bargaining, but also a separate promise not to
pursue another proposal Obama supported during the campaign: importing cheaper drugs from Canada or Europe.""
The White House's Jim Messina later confirmed Tauzin's claim, stating, ""The president encouraged this approach ... He
wanted to bring all the parties to the table to discuss health insurance reform.""
Democratic lawmakers were furious. Rep. Raul Grijaiva, chairman of the Progressive Caucus, asked, ""Are industry groups
going to be the ones at the table who get the first big piece of the pie and we just fight over the crust?""
***
On September 7, Baucus' bill made a private circulation on the Hill; pharmaceutical industry cost-cutting did not exceed
$80 billion. Five days later, the New York :limes reported that PhRMA planned to spend up to $150 million in an
advertising blitz in support of Baucus' bill. The Times noted that the ad spending ""...would be a follow-up to the deal that
drug makers struck in June with Mr. Baucus and the White House."" On September 16, Baucus released the full text of his
les.j
.islation to the public. t
The White House, PhRMA and Baucus still had to fight a few battles to keep the deal intact. The key amendment
targeting the PhRMA deal in committee mark-up came from Sen. Bill Nelson from Florida, which has one of the largest
Medicare participant populations in the nation. The pull of constituent needs clearly put Bill Nelson into a position to push
for further cost cutting in Medicare prescription drug pricing. His target: closing the ""donut hole"" completely.
Nelson claimed that his amendment would onerate $106 billion in revenue, or from PhRMA's perspective increase their
cost-cutting to $186 billion. That would be unacceptable to PhRMA, to Baucus, to the White House and to the
pharmaceutical industry who had made the deal. Other Senate Democrats, Tom Carper and Robert Menendez voted with
Republicans and Baucus on the committee to defeat the amendment. It is little surprise the Carper's Delaware is home to
AstraZeneca and Menendez' New Jersey is home to Merck and Bristol-Myers-Squibb, all of which lobbied for the $80
billion cap.
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid introduced the final bill, with the cap in place, on November 19. Debate began on Dec.
3, and with it come one more attempt by members to change the terms of the deal. Senator Byron Dorgan introduced an
amendment that would allow for drug re-importation, but as the date for voting drew near, the Federal Drug Administration
(FDA) released a letter objecting to the proposal that echoed pharmaceutical industry talking points: ""...as currently
written, the resulting structure would be logistically challenging to implement and resource intensive. In addition, there are
significant safety concerns."" Dorgan's amendment was defeated with numerous Democrats previously in support of
reimportation switching to ""no"" votes.
On Christmas Eve, the bill passed the Senate with the PhRMA deal fully intact.
***
New Year's Eve passed with no further action on health care reform. Public opinion regarding the health care reform bill
had been slipping throughout 2009. It reached a fulcrum in the special election to replace the deceased senator Ted
Kennedy in Massachusetts on January 19, 2010. Newly minted senator Scott Brown campaigned that he would be the
senator to provide Republicans with the votes to filibuster the final health care reform bill. Democrats ran for cover.
Despite having the largest majorities of any party since the 1970s, Democrats put the brakes on their agenda, particularly
health care reform.
in the end, the pharmaceutical industry's support for health care reform would be left up in the air. After spending $100
million in advertising in support of legislation that Tauzin and key executives hoped would be a windfall for the
pharmaceutical industry, the legislative process had flat-lined. In February, the board of PhRMA, split over the deal cut by
Tauzin, pushedjauzin to_res
..i
.s., his .post.
In an interview with Diane Sawvqf., President Obama owed up to failures in the process of passing health care reform,
""[The health care debate as it unfolded legitimately raised concerns not just among my opponents, but also amongst
supporters that we just don't know what's going on ... And it's an ugly process and it looks like there are a bunch of back
room deals."""
3962,"sbwhoeop
Saturday, February 13, 2010 10:25 AM
also...
H: Steve Clemons called me last night to talk about this, which he's just posted on his website. Ed Luce of the FT of
course told him. Also, Clemons had dinner this week with Petraeus, who freely talked about running for president. Sid
John Podesta on Obama team. I am hearing that Financial Times Washington Bureau Chief Edward Luca has a pretty
significant interview with Center for American Progress President and former White House Chief of Staff Jahn ?od.esta
coming out on Monday. Luce recently did a video intervjew 'with Senator john,Mc
fCain. One source tells me that Podesta
""goes farther"" in his critique of the Obama team than his already pretty direct comments in Luce's recent survey of the
Obama White House's inner workings."
3963,"Cherie Blair
Saturday, February 13, 2010 10:30 AM
RE: Get well soon
B6
I AM SO GLAD. If you get a chance remind Sheikha Mosa of me as I am wanting her to support my woman's foundation
so every little reminder helps!"
3964,"sbwhoeop
Saturday, February 13, 2010 10:30 AM
Re: H: FYI, you might want to read this one. Sid
His father learned about the piece only after its publication, another point of pride."
3965,"Cherie Blair
Saturday, February 13, 2010 10:31 AM
RE: Get well soon
We are all in Oman!"
3966,"Cherie Blair
Saturday, February 13, 2010 10:34 AM
RE: Get well soon
RELEASE IN PART
B6"
3967,"sbwhoeop
Saturday, February 13, 2010 10:36 AM
Re: also...
Clemons posted this piece on his dinner with Petraeus, (it's replete with a lot of punditry), but he told me more detail about
his attitude and interest. Among other things, Petraeus recounted a joke about Gates' speech at the Alfalfa Club dinner
that Petraeus couldn't be there because he was in Iowa. Petraeus didn't tell that story to disdain the possibility. He smiled
and watched closely for reaction from others. S
February 13, 2010
Steve Cemons
Publisher of ""The Washington Note""
../T1 • ""
Pt r:1:°' t
„, •. N (1 :(1 Jr) F*
az.,-.1,--anrac,sounga.awarnrmacta=ava-,_rmuacartatmott--=-0....
-rmaamaxatiAmasm...u.cnromar........,...r.nocura-
-uarni.m.rarcnt.r.trnmar.rarti:4.3resecono....riatvars:
I recently had the opportunity to participate in a small dinner with CENTCOM Commander .
General David Petraeus and his wife Holly. These sorts of discussions are nearly always off the record -- but the fact that
they happened is not off limits.
Petraeus was not in uniform but rather wore what looked to me to be a brand new, perfectly tailored dark suit. I joked to
him that if I Twilt.-
-s
,rgc, that out of two dozen or so times I had seen Petraeus that this was the first time I'd seen him out of
uniform, an ice cold shudder of fear would spread quickly through some political circles in DC.
In August of 2007, I wroteoiece, stating that folks should keep an eye out for the possibility that General Petraeus might
run for President in 2012. In April 2008, Steven Lee Myers wrote a solid New York Times follow up titled ""The
General"" referencing my earlier take.
Recently, legendary newsman Ai:nai4d de 13orchgave resuscitated the topic of an Eisenhoweresque future for the
counterinsurgency guru in his piece, ""President ?etraeus7""
Petraeus was recently named as one of Foreign Policy magazine's tip 100 ttzal thinkers, and as U.S. News & World
Reports ""Washington Whispers"" notes, he is going to be speaking in May 2010 at the annual American Enterprise
Institute dinner receiving the Irving Kristol Award.
In January 2010, Public Policy Pollin.q revealed that while Obama held a ten point lead over a potential wild card race
against Petraeus, the General had some strengths. But the pollsters also noted that many in the American public just
didn't know enough yet about Petraeus to form an opinion:
Finally our blog readers voted for David Petraeus as our wild card Republican this month and his
numbers come out as a mixed bag. He has the largest deficit against Obama, trailing 44-34. But at +13
his net favorability is better than the President or any of the other Republicans we tested. The problem for
him is that the numbers break down 25/12- 63% of voters in the country don't know enough about him to
have formed an opinion. Who knows if Petraeus would actually have any interest in going into politics, but
if he did he would be introducing himself to many voters for the first time.
President Obama himself, according to what some of his aides have reported to me, is quite taken with David Petraeus
and respects his approach and thinking.
Petraeus has also been respectful of the President -- although when pushed at a recent forum about how he might react
to a Presidential decision on Afghanistan that the General might not have liked, Petraeus offered a cryptic rather than
clear response. (see above video)
At the ""First Draft of History"" meeting sponsored by the Atlantic Monthly/Atlantic Media Group, the Newseum, and the
Aspen Institute; Petraeus when asked if he would support the President no matter what the result of the strategic review
on Afghanistan responded that he ""would continue to give the President the best professional military advice he could.""
Contrast that with Defense Secretary Robert Gates resoonOinato_the..saest.ipr
.j., ""We will salute and execute [the
President's] decisions faithfully and to the best of our ability.""
But after spending an evening with General Petraeus and watching him closely for a number of years, there is no way that
this intelligent leader -- with whom I have some disagreements but respect -- could be comfortable with the Tea Party
takeover of the Republican political machine.
There is always the possibility that a core of reasonable Republicans like Michael Bloomberg, James Baker, Olympia
Snowe, Chuck Hegel, Alan Simpson, John Whitehead, Peter Peterson, Rita Hauser and others will try to rekindle classic
Republican sensibilities by fighting to re-hijack their party back in an Eisenhower-like campaign with Petraeus at the lead.
Remember that Eisenhower clinched the Republican nomination by promising to be the President who though he knew
war would end the Korean War. Petraeus knows Afghanistan and Iraq -- and though it seems hard to envision today could
be the kind of leader promising to end those wars if Obama proves unable to do so.
But there is another option that intrigues me and seems more realistic than imagining the iconic David Petraeus running
for President -- and that is his running for Vice President.
I think Vice President Joe Biden has done an outstanding job and of all the big guns in the Obama White House, Biden
has done the best job of outperforming expectations. He had given President Obama much needed counsel, not always
taken regrettably, but counsel that Obama needed to show the American public he was getting. Biden has been the key
agent behind the scenes in moving Iraq's elections forward. He has scored a lot of wins -- not reported -- in the
nuclear/WMD controls arena. Biden has worked with Gates in stabilizing an awkward and complex relationship with
Russia -- and his counterpoints on the Afghanistan surge, in my view, remain compelling.
But Biden is going to have to find a way to hold his spot in 2012 because others are going to be gunning for it.
As I look at it now, Hillary Clinton who has now said that she will not do more than one term as Secretary of State would
be a natural candidate for the Obama VP slot. Her franchise is not completely in the control of the Obama team yet, but
moving Hillary closer to the White House (although her private home on Whitehaven Street is actually a couple of hundred
feet closer to the White House than the VP residence at the Naval Observatory) would finalize Obarna's takeover of all the
key political franchises in the Democratic Party -- starting with Daley's machine, Deschle's machine, Kennedy's machine,
Edwards' machine, and then the Clintons'.
But General David Petraeus, in his business suit, lurks out there. Obama seems to be concerned about looking like he is
weak on national security. The Republicans -- at Cheney's constant goading (and now Sarah Palin's) -- seem to want to
continue to play politics through fear-mongering.
Obama could neutralize the possibility that he faces a Republican party challenge by David Petraeus by inviting the
General on to the 2012 ticket as a Democrat.
Crazy? Perhaps.
But inviting potential rivals into his tent is becoming a standard Obama trademark -- much as he did by appointing
Republican Governor of Utah and former G.W. Bush administration Deputy US Trade Representative Jon Huntsman, Jr.
to serve as US Ambassador to the People's Republic of China.
And get this, we have just learned that David Petraeus has not voted since 2002 -- not because he doesn't care to vote --
but reportedly because he wants to keep his eventual political options and political loyalties open.
This is a soldier for whom all options are on the table and who is keeping his powder dry.
My hunch is that whether Obama sticks with Vice President Biden or pivots to someone else, Petraeus will be on the short
list of those considered.
-- Steve Clemons publishes the popular political blog, The Washington Note."
3968,"sbwhoeop
Saturday, February 13, 2010 10:41 AM
Re: also...
yes, Luce will publish on Monday. Clemons runs the foreign policy program at New America Foundation, a character
around town, very busy, gossipy, gay, friend of Laurie Rubiner (from her NAF days), former moderate Republican, funded
in part by Bernard Schwartz, foreign policy realist, and who began his career as a walker of Hollywood wives."
3969,Greg Craig had confided in Clemons his version of what happened to him. I'll tell you when you return from your trip.
3970,"Madam Secretary, Tamara Wittes and Alex Djerassi from NEA have been working with Megan this morning on what we
in NEA, at least (and obviously we defer to you!), see as the real opportunity of the speech: to lay out a simple theme
about Cairo that has somehow gotten lost --
Jeffrey Feltman
Assistant Secretary
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs
Department of State
202-647-7209"
3971,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, February 13, 2010 12:42 PM
H
FW: Doha speech
Megan had a long, and I think productive, conversation with Judith about the speech this morning. You are absolutely
right on the tone, and Judith helped Megan work through adjustments
I just spoke with Megan, who is now taking another turn through it."
3972,"Yes -- in the draft they received, violent extremism came first They
also gave comments on how to frame the Middle East portion -- Megan is working that. And they had a number of
specific edits on phraseology and the like."
3973,"In keeping w/ email I sent you re my conversation w/ robert wexler and danny abraham, this speech is doing exactly what
is needed on our side. To encourage KSA and others to respond, however,"
3974,"Funny you mention it -- nearly everyone who has given comments on the speech has tried their hand at ""improving"" that
paragraph (usually reflecting their own notions of what the endstate should look like), not recognizing that it is sacred
language. We're protecting it."
3975,Yes
3976,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, February 13, 2010 9:28 PM
Huma Abedin; H
Re: hi huma/
About to land in shannon. Will call soon."
3977,"I think I mentioned to you that Carols Pascual has asked me to work with him on a public awareness campaign targeting
the Mexican public and designed to maintain support for the campaign against the drug cartels. The attached article,
which he wrote, addresses this issue. I have approached Keith Reinhard at Business for Diplomatic Action to work with
us on this matter. Keith thinks he can organize a US/Mexican creative coalition to work on it. Might be an interesting
model for Haiti if it works here.
Hope the trip is going well.
JM"
3979,"...Are asking about what the mounting evidence is that Iran is building toward a bomb. They are taking it as a little
different from previous formulations.
We're saying Qom, 20 pct enrichment, refusal on TRR, etc."
3980,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, February 14, 2010 3:20 PM
H: FYI. The end of Justice Jim. Sid
Supreme Court Justice Jim Johnson, known both for his segregationist political activities in the 1950s and dabbling in
the political campaign against Bill Clinton during his presidency, died yesterday.
A Faulkner County sheriffs office spokesman, Lt. Matt Rice, said Johnson was found dead in his home about 10 a.m.
Saturday with an apparently self-inflicted chest wound from a .30-30 rifle. Johnson had been beset by medical
problems, he said. Roller-McNutt Funeral Home in Conway will be handling arrangements.
He was 85. Here's a standat biographica: hstory. This will end his prolific and pointed letters to the editor (unless some
are still in the pipeline), delivered on stationery marked with his name for his Conway home, ""White Haven.""
Justice Jim was a courtly man and lively company, gracious in social interaction with friend and political foe. But Mark
Anthony's words in Julius Caesar about men's deeds come, unavoidably, to mind. As recently as 1990, he worked in an
effort to preserve state Amendment 44, the states rights amendment aimed at curbing integration that was his brainchild.
It had long been declared unconstitutional by federal courts and was barely repealed by voters."
3981,"Cole
Lee
Chandler
Stearns
Hastings
Whitfield
Ryan
Edwards"
3982,What a sad ending to the tale.
3983,"I was holding the 4pm but all flights look good as of this afternoon.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
3984,"sbwhoeop
Monday, February 15, 2010 2:37 PM
Re: H: FYI. The end of Justice Jim. Sid
I thought your designation of Iran as a near military government was very good. Gary Sick has been arguing that it is in
fact a military government. Of course this is predicate for targeted sanctions. There is a consistent thread in the
challenges we face from a host of authoritarian (and totalitarian) military governments, sometimes loosely allied on an ad
hoc basis--Iran, China, Myanmar, Venezuela, Cuba. This is nothing like the Cold War, but it's an idea worth exploring, not
publicly discussing, but thinking about.
On Justice Jim, a couple of thoughts: I wish his tragic end were as politically conclusive as that of Edmund Ruffin, the
Southern fire-eater and secessionist who was given the honor of firing the first shot at Fort Sumter and upon hearing of
Appomattox carefully sat himself down in his grand Charleston house and blew his brains out with a shotgun.
Unfortunately, the evil Justice Jim did lives on--in the wild bigotry against Obama and even through the Supreme Court
decision in the case of Citizens United, a group he helped galvanize to circulate the Whitewater hoax.
Sid"
3985,You still up?
3986,"sbwhoeop
Monday, February 15, 2010 6:57 PM
Podesta
Podesta: W.H. 'lost' health
narrative
By: AH!,
February 15, 2010 03:03 PM
EST
John Podesta, the president of the
Center for American Progress who
led Barack Obama's presidential
transition, acknowledges the White
House has been unable to
successfully drive the debate on
health care reform.
""They lost the narrative,"" Podesta
told the Financial Times. ""They lost
the perspective of how all of the
activity they were engaged in was
knit together.""
In a video interview posted on the
newspaper's website Monday,
Podesta also bemoaned the
present political climate in
Washington and expressed
frustration with inability of the White
House and Congress to advance
the president's agenda.
""Change is hard in America. We've
all learned that over the last year,""
said the former White House chief
of staff under Bill Clinton. ""There is
real frustration amongst
independent voters, and anger
amongst independent voters.""
Voters have become discouraged,
Podesta said, by seeing ""no spirit in
which people were having a
reasonable conversation"" during the
health care debate and from ""the
last twist and turns on health care,
the special deals that had to be
made in the Senate to get the 60
votes.""
Asked how he would rate the health
of the American political system, he
responded simply: ""Sucks.""
""It feels like a very frustrated
country, a country frustrated with
the inability of Washington to do
anything to get the economy going
again, to get jobs going again,"" he
said. ""And I think that there is
tremendous anger [and] frustration
about the inability to improve
people's lives.""
Republicans also have shown little
ability to raise the level of debate,
Podesta suggested.
Obama's ""not dealing with the party
of Lincoln. He's dealing with the
party of Palin,"" Podesta said,
referring to Sarah Palin, the former
Alaska governor who was the 2008
GOP vice presidential nominee.
0 2010 Capitol News Company, LLC"
3987,"February 3, 2010
For: Hillary"
3989,"sbwhoeop
Tuesday, February 16, 2010 8:40 AM
H: FYI: Les Gelb. S
Replace Rahm
by Leslie H. Gelb
February 15, 2010 I 10:48pm
I ....7IKristoffer Tripplaar / SPA President Obama desperately needs a sweeping staff shakeup to
save his presidency. Leslie H. Gelb on why he must reassign Rahm, dump Larry Summers, and get rid
of National Security adviser Jim Jones.
The negative, even dismissive, talk about the Obama White House has reached a critical point. The president must
change key personnel now. Unless he speedily sets up a new team, he will be reduced to a speechmaker. It's mostly a
matter of relocating the Chicago and campaign crowd who surround the Oval Office and inserting people with proven
records of getting things done in Washington and the world.
To be fair, it's not clear whether the bad judgments on priorities, practicalities, and steadiness come from Mr. Obama or
his White House team. Maybe he overpowers them in discussions, or maybe he gives them a role in policymaking far
beyond their experience in that realm. Unless you're there, you don't know. But Mr. Obama is the president, and except
for the right-wing crazies, most Americans still recognize his great talents and promise. It is he who's got to be helped. So
it is they who've got to go.
It is he who's got to be helped. So it is they who've got to go.
One may quarrel with my sense of urgency here. But it's hard to have a conversation with opinion leaders anywhere—and
especially in Washington—that doesn't descend into ripping Obama's White House team. The refrain of complaints is
always the same:
• Obama is forever taking strong stances only to backfill and trim. Most recently, he said he did not ""begrudge"" Wall
Streeters their big earnings because that was part of the market system. This, in the face of his saying only a couple of
weeks ago that such big bonuses were ""shameful.""
• Obama doesn't know what's really going on. Regarding the Middle East, he recently said that ""I think it is absolutely true
that what we did this year didn't produce the kind of breakthrough that we wanted, and if we had anticipated some of
these political problems on both sides earlier, we might not have raised expectations as high."" He had to be totally out of it
not to realize that the Palestinians and Israelis were nowhere close to sitting down with each other and dealing.
• Obama wants to get along with everyone so badly he doesn't recognize real opposition when he sees it—let alone know
how to deal with it. He emerges from a meeting with congressional Republican leaders on health-care reform and says he
is ""an eternal optimist—when those very same Republican leaders just told the press that they don't see any common
ground and believe the administration has to ""scrap the bill and start over.""
• It's even hard to follow his latest Afghan policy. He calls Afghanistan a ""war of necessity"" and orders more than 30,000
new troops there, coupled with an announcement that he'll begin withdrawing some of them in a year plus, only to see
some of his advisers say he will start withdrawals and some say he won't.
I've scribbled similar points in recent months in The Daily Beast. And last week in The Financial Times, Edward Luce
provided a thunderclap on Washington's negative consensus about the incompetence of Obarna's Chicago-laden team.
Luce named names in the White House, and a number of journalists and bloggers strikingly failed to link to the Luce story.
They were said to fear the wrath of the Chicagoans. Steve Clemons, author of The Washington Note, essentially
eridorse.d the Luce finding and slapped his fellow bloggers' wrists for hiding from this issue. The situation is as serious as
it was during the Carter administration. There, two very capable political campaigners--Hamilton Jordan and Jody
Powell—moved into critical White House positions without knowing very much about doing business in Washington. And
they were, quite naturally, too busy to learn. They also added to the ""them"" versus ""us"" (Washington insiders and
bureaucrats versus the regular guys from Georgia) mentality that plagues most administrations.
The Chicagoans and others ""guarding"" the president create their own ""us versus them"" world. It's hard to imagine a policy
conversation between the president and the Chicago crowd, since none of them, except Rahm Emanuel, has Washington
or policy experience. And there isn't much evidence that they bring in strong-minded outsiders to challenge the president
on a regular basis either. The result is an inexperienced president advised by an inexperienced team.
Here are the personnel changes being bruited about in political and policy circles: First, remove Rahm Emanuel as chief
of staff and move him to a senior political adviser slot. No one I've talked to believes he has the management skills and
discipline to run the White House. But he is a terrific political mind and a fighter and should be given the new job and the
time to do his thing. Proven pros who could step right in include the following: Erskine Bowles, president of the University
of North Carolina and former Clinton chief of staff; Leon Panetta, now CIA director and formerly White House chief as well
under Clinton; Sylvia Mathews, a former deputy chief of staff also under Clinton; and John Podesta, another former
Clinton chief who now heads the Center for American Progress. All four are tough and know how to manage.
Replace Lawrence Summers, director of the White House's National Economic Council, with Paul Volcker, the former
chairman of the Federal Reserve. Summers is brilliant and highly controversial; he's been beaten up and is said to want
out anyway. Volcker has unmatched stature, practical experience, and the courage of a lion. He is the only one now in a
position to get down to step-by-step brass tacks on the economy and stop Mr. Obama's weekly gyrations. Others with
proven track records who can help as inside or outside advisers are: Stephen Robert, formerly head of Oppenheimer,
Vincent Mai, former leader of AEA Investors, and Tom Hill of Blackstone. There are also two economic stars in
Washington who'd improve both policymaking and public combat: Sheila Bair, chairwoman of the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, and Elizabeth Warren, chair of the Congressional Oversight Panel. One outside adviser above all
would help the president see the economic hard choices ahead: Peter G. Peterson, accomplished businessman and
policy head.
David Axelrod, the senior political adviser to the president, needs to concentrate on the next presidential campaign,
wherein his expertise lies, and not on domestic and foreign policy, where he is just another smart unknowledgeable voice.
Good replacements who do know the politics of Washington would be the aforementioned Podesta; and Tom Deschle, the
former Democratic Senate Majority Leader. As for David Plouffe, another senior campaign aide, now in unofficial
residence at the White House, he should be lodged in the nearby Executive Office Building. Senior adviser and Chicago
buddy Valerie Jarrett is too much a part of the inner circle to move, but she should be given a more limited role in making
policy.
Mr. Obama's crowd appears to think that getting things done means his giving another speech. It's nice, but not nearly
enough.
Robert Gibbs needs a rest from being press secretary. Let's put it this way: He wasn't born for daily jousts with pithy
Republicans. His job calls for memorable and pointed phrases and attacks, not circle-the-wagon circumlocutions. Possible
successors? Try Doyle McManus of the L.A. Times, Jake Tapper of ABC News, or Helene Cooper of The New York
Times.
Last but not least, James Jones, the National Security Adviser, has to move on. The career Marine was greatly admired
and respected as Commandant of the Corps and as NATO's military chief. He handled those duties with great skill. But by
wide acclamation inside and outside the White House, he has not emerged as a strategist—perhaps the key requirement
of this key position. The person in that job has to pull everything together—laying out achievable objectives and precise
plans to dispense carefully packaged carrots and sticks. One Democrat who could step in now, despite his age, is
Zbigniew Brzezinski, Jimmy Carter's national-security adviser. He has a first-rate strategic mind—a rare quality—and
knows how to deliver results. Obama will need to iron out Zbig's lack of sympathy toward Israel and Russia.
Also available are a boatload of first-class retired diplomats with the judgment and background needed to perform the
National Security Council job effectively. They would be greeted with applause both at home and abroad. Try former
ambassadors Thomas Pickering, Morton Abramowitz, Frank Wisner, Reginald Bartholomew, and Winston Lord. They
have it all. At a minimum, they and others like them should form the core of a group that meets regularly with Obama on
strategy.
Yes, many of the pros suggested above have reached their golden years. But 70 and even 80 are the new 60. They all
possess the necessary energy, experience and rare skill in delivering results. They are also shovel-ready. As a critical
bonus, they could and would mentor the next generation down, a very talented one indeed, to succeed them in two or
three years. To lead America and the world, Obama has to grow far beyond his present propensity to treat problems as
intellectual puzzles—to collect facts and hear the arguments. The great tasks of governing demand proven intuition in
sensing what's achievable, which buttons to push when, how to buy the time for power to take hold, how to make
adjustments without flagrantly foolish rhetoric, how to avoid failures that only diminish power, and how to succeed in small
as well as large ways. With a team versed in such arts and skills, President Obama and America would succeed.
Leslie H. Gelb, a former New York Times columnist and senior government official, is author of powerRule,5-. How
Common Sense Can Rescue A /*Verican Foreigp (HarperCollins 2009), a book that shows how to think about and
use power in the 21st century. He is president emeritus of the Council on Foreign Relations.
For more of The Daily Beast, toecorn..-:! a fan on Facebook and follow us on Twitter.
For inquiries, please contact The Daily Beast at E-Aitorial©thedailybeast.com.
URL: http://www.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2010-02-15/replace-rahm/p/"
3990,"I confess that I will never understand how Shaun decides when to call me, DecIan, Lou Susman, or Sid with breaking
news. So many channels!
We've been hearing all day that Peter would take a back-me-or-sack-me public vote of his party. Hopefully tomorrow
will be the day -- and hopefully he'll be successful.
In an interesting show of strength, he has announced he'll resume as First Minister."
3992,"Pse see the Economist article below -- for their analysis not just of the human rights situation but also how to deal w/ the
Chinese. AM"
3993,Actually binder almost ready so speech is coming in binder
3994,"February 17, 2010
For: Hillary"
3995,"Thanks for the new years wish. You can give Senator Gillibrand my name, but I will also ask Miguel to call her Leg
Director in the morning. And I will work with Jake to track down Aga Khan's roadmap to stability.
See you tomorrow."
3996,"MS,
General Petraeus just logged a call to you from his liaison office in the Pentagon. He will be there until 4:00 PM
today. I will add to your grid.
Lauren"
3997,His office just called back again to offer another number that they prefer we use. I've made a note of it here.
3999,"Happy New Year to you, too! I'm sorry for the delay in getting back to you.
On menu: As a start, I can make a list of the lunches that he's made so far. Jason is given money advances. I'm not
positive of the total for last year since I came in April but I can have that answer for you by morning. I have skim milk for
you.
On the Human Rights Watch Report: I found it online and will print. It is 96 pages so I can put this in a binder if you'd like.
Parks and Recreation: NBC Thursdays at 8:30pm The Good Wife: CBS Tuesdays at lOpm
And it is a huge honor to work for you. I learn so much every day and I am so grateful for this unforgettable experience.
Thank you!"
4002,"We have it
Already working on schedule"
4003,"Madam Secretary, good evening. I just received a question
PJ"
4004,"The first woman professor tenured at Darmouth, who I know, described you as ""radiant"" at this event.
Cheers!
Under Secretary of State
for Democracy and Global Affairs
Department of State .
2201 C St NW Room 7261
Washington DC 20520
202 - 647-6240"
4007,Will do. PJ
4008,"Madam Secretary,
Jake mentioned that you would like to see a copy of John Podesta's recent interview with the Financial Times. A
transcript of the interview has not been posted yet, but I have included here the Financial Times article about the
interview. Please just let me know if you would like any further information on this.
Best,
Mike
Former aide urges Obama to regain 'political narrative'
By Edward Luce in Washington
Published: February 15 2010
Barack Obama, US president, has lost control of the political narrative and needs to make more use of his cabinet in
order to regain it, says John Podesta, the man who headed the president's transition team.
""My friends in the White House would agree with this, that they lost the narrative,"" Mr Podesta said in an interview for
View from DC, the Financial Times' video series from Washington. ""Clearly that needs not one speech once in a while: it
needs, I think, to be constantly reinforced. And not just by the president, but by his entire team ... He's got a terrific
cabinet. Use it. Get out into the country and use it.""
Mr Podesta, who was also a chief of staff to Bill Clinton, drew parallels with the former president's difficulties in his first
two years, which culminated in the 1994 Republican takeover of Congress following the failure of healthcare reform.
When asked whether the failure of this latest attempt at healthcare reform would result in a similar electoral
""massacre"" for the Democratic party at the mid-term elections in November, he said: ""I subscribe to that view.""
Mr Podesta founded the Centre for American Progress, Washington's largest liberal think-tank, which was often
described as a ""government-in-exile"" during the years George W. Bush was in the White House. He said Mr Obama had
three options with healthcare reform. First, try to enact the whole thing by using the budget reconciliation process,
which would enable it to pass with 51 votes. The Democrats lost their controlling 60-seat super-majority last month in a
election defeat in Massachusetts.
The second would be to pass a watered down bill with Republican support The third would be to abandon the attempt,
as Mr Clinton did in 1993.
Mr Podesta, whom Mr Obama still regularly consults, said there was still a better than 50:50 chance of getting reform
through. ""The worst option among the three is doing nothing, and so they're going to have to figure out which track is
viable,"" he said. ""It may mean doing it with only Democratic votes. But if that is such, then so be it.""
He painted a fairly bleak view of the overall health of US politics. ""It sucks,"" he said. Pointing to a strategy of
obstructionism by Republican lawmakers, he said: ""I think the president is trying to re-engage with Republicans, but,
quite frankly, he's not dealing with the party of [Abraham] Lincoln. He's dealing with the party of [Sarah] Palin.""
The growth of partisanship and the increasing difficulty in getting any big reforms through the Senate were threatening
to turn the US into, ""in essence, a parliamentary system without majority rule"", where the opposition automatically
opposes any serious initiatives.
The political stasis in California provided the writing on the wall for the US as a whole, he said. Since the 1978 passage of
Proposition 13 in the state, all budget changes had required a two-thirds majority. ""And so nothing gets done.""
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
(cell) B6"
4009,"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence *En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:40 am Secretary's Office
8:40 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY MEETING OF SENIOR STAFF
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am MONDAY MEETING w/ASSISTANT SECRETARIES
10:00 am Principals Conference Room 7516
10:00 am OFFICE TIME
11:00 am Secretary's Office
11:00 am BILATERAL w/QATARI PRIME MINISTER AND FOREIGN MINISTER
11:45 am SHEIKH HAMAD BIN JASSIM JABR AL-THANI Secretary's Conference Room
*Official photo in East Hall preceding.
11:45 am PRESS PRE-BRIEF
11:50 am Secretary's Office
11:50 am JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/QATARI PRIME MINISTER AND
12:00 pm FOREIGN MINISTER SHEIKH HAMAD BIN JASSIM JABR AL-THANI
Treaty Room
12:10 pm DEPART State Department *En route Blair House
12:15 pm ARRIVE Blair House
12:15 pm WORKING LUNCH FOR QATARI PRIME MINISTER AND
1:15 pm FOREIGN MINISTER HAMAD BIN JASSIM JABR AL-THANI
Lee Dining Room, Blair House
1:20 pm DEPART Blair House *En route State Department
1:25 pm ARRIVE State Department
1:30 pm OFFICE TIME
2:00 pm Secretary's Office
2:00 pm MEETING w/JOHN BEYRLE, U.S. AMBASSADOR TO RUSSIA
2:30 pm Secretary's Office
2:30 pm OFFICE TIME
6:00 pm Secretary's Office
6:00 pm DEPART State Department *En route Private Residence
6:10 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
4010,Fyi
4011,Pi -- let's connect first thing. This was not new policy.
4012,See traffic WI
4013,"Of course, will book today.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
4014,See VI - perhaps was prescient - see VI
4015,Yes we can do that this afternoon.
4016,"process
FYI — we're getting a copy to your house as well."
4017,"I didn't know that to be the case.
Not sure if we can get the research b/f you speak but will try"
4018,"Will do.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
4019,"I haven't forgotten. While we were in the Gulf I asked Phil and Liz and the DCM-note-taker to send everything they had.
I will find time to compile today.
Will be a fun project!"
4020,I will add Goldwyn and double check on Boswell.
4021,"You are correct - Eric Boswell is A/5 for Diplomatic Security. Jeff Culver is the Director of DS. I apologize for the mistake.
I have added Goldwyn and corrected Boswell. It takes about a week to have a notebook printed. Would you like me to
go ahead and place an order or wait for more changes/until you use the current stock?"
4022,"I thought you both should hear the words of Andrew Stear, DG of policy at DFID, who told me yesterday that
""throughout the development community around the world there is great relief that the US is back, and leading
particularly in health and food security/agriculture. He said that we were once again the acknowledge ""go to people"" in
both these areas. He also had lots to say that will b v useful in QDDR re relationship b/w development and diplomacy."
4023,"House Members (8): Clyburn (Majority Whip/House delegation leader), Conyers, Rangel, Thompson, Barbara
Lee, Connie Mack, Mary Bono Mack, Donna Christensen.
House Staff (2): Stacee Bako (Speaker Pelosi), Dave Grimaldi (Clyburn)
Senators (7 — add'I House Member likely to get 8th slot): Durbin (Majority Whip/Senate delegation leader),
Bingaman, Bill Nelson, Klobuchar, Lemieux, Barasso and 1 other senator TBD.
Senate Staff (2): TBD
Still a chance the trip doesn't go tomorrow depending on the snow storm. Will make a go/no go decision by
cob today."
4024,FYI
4025,"I get these reports every morning. They are somewhat painful to read since, as you know, in Pakistan, the
media can be particularly outrageous. However, we can't ignore the fact that these talk shows are the most
watched programming in prime time.. The report below is fairly typical. The host sets up the discussion in
fairly provocative way and the guests, who come from across the political spectrum, respond. As you can
see, the first commentator is strongly anti US. However, what I, have observed since our media offensive
began last Fall is that there is usually a more moderate guest as well, who will argue along the lines that it is
only natural for the US to protect its interests and GOP should do a better job of protecting Pakistan. Believe it
or not there have even been instances where we get credit for some of the things we do. Also on occasion
where there have been particularly egregious attacks on US policy, the host will read a statement from our
Embassy in the following programming. We try to get airtime on these programs whenever possible but it is
hard. It 's a hard slog getting this right but we are making progress.
im"
4026,"I am in touch with Simon directly, we are trying to lock in a March date. Will finalize today.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
4027,"Dear Secretary:
I was pleased to learn about your development speech this week, and offered the insights below to Anne-Marie earlier
today. Overall, it's a very good speech, and I look forward to hearing you deliver it tomorrow.
4. Mike, through Dan Baer, and I provided language to ensure consistency with the Human Rights Speech.
Thank you,
Maria
Under Secretary of State
for Democracy and Global Affairs
Department of State
2201 C St. NW Room 7261
Washington DC 20520
202 - 647-6240"
4028,"You may have already heard this, but wanted to alert you that Senator Dorgan this evening announced
that he would not seek reelection and is retiring.
He would have been up for reelection in November but his numbers were solid and he wasn't facing a
particularly strong field.
Below is a copy of his statement:
""Over this holiday season, I have come to the conclusion, with the support of my family, that I will not be
seeking another term in the U.S. Senate in 2010. It is a hard decision to make after thirty years in the
Congress, but I believe it is the right time for me to pursue these other interests. Let me be clear that
this decision does not relate to any dissatisfaction that I have about serving in the Senate. Yes, I wish
there was less rancor and more bipartisanship in the U.S. Senate these days. But still, it is a great
privilege to serve and I have the utmost respect for all of the men and women with whom I serve.""
Miguel E. Rodriguez
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Senate Affairs
Bureau of Legislative Affairs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2645
rodriguezme@state.gov"
4029,"FYI
B6"
4030,"Just thought you should know that I met w/
today and he said that at the London meeting you were ""fabulous on gender issues — all the Arab
leaders didn't know what hit them."" Raising the issue matters. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972
1.4(D)
B1"
4031,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, February 19, 2010 4:05 PM
FW: Haiti Conference Call.
FYI
We are including them as a representative of the EU and asking them to 1.4(D)
B1
cdm"
4032,"She's sorta right. We post as much video as we can, and bat 1.000 on domestic events. Tougher on overseas events
since we don't have the resources abroad with us that we have here at home. We held a meeting with the web &
broadcasting folks today to talk about this, and came up with a few ways to bolster our road video.
But generally speaking, it's a huge priority for us all to post video whenever possible."
4034,"I will be traveling today, February 19, with intermittent access to my email. If you need to reach me urgently please
contact Nora Toiv, Toivnf@state.gov, 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych, laszczychj@state.gov, 202-647-5548.
Thank you!"
4035,fyi
4037,fyi
4038,"More photos. Hope you're having a lovely weekend. Hudson River is particularly exquisite today.
JM"
4039,As we discussed yesterday
4040,"He was scheduled to talk to Ryabkov this am to talk through resolution elements and to check in on missile defense, etc.
I will follow up."
4041,"on: 02/20/2025
Below is a barebones readout he typed out on his blackberry and sent to Alice, his exec asst, this morning. 1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Quick bberry readout of 40 min call Sat am from Frankfurt airport. B1"
4042,"I thought you shd know that Gen Petraeus is receiving the James Madison medal today at Princeton's alumni day as the 1
graduate alumnus who best exemplifies princeton's motto of princeton in the nation's service and the service of all 1
nations. He is enormously proud, as he shd be, to get this award. I think it would be great if you sent him an email
congratulating him. AM"
4043,Fyi
4044,Ok
4046,Yes - will be in offc for part of afternoon so will send you time while you are in church.
4047,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Sunday, February 21, 2010 10:51 AM
H
Asked me to call back with details. Any direction?"
4049,great
4050,"Sounds good. I have the Latin America message meeting slated for Tuesday and will follow up on Andrew,
Hormats/Otero request."
4051,It's a good point. We'll get with Phil et al and sort this through.
4054,Sid
4055,"w/o presuming on the content of the call, you might want to remember that Bildt wrote a very good op-ed after your
internet freedom speech suggesting U.S.-EU cooperation in that area; the Swedish ambassador came to see me last
week to follow up and to say that the Bildt would like to host a meeting in Stockholm on the subject that Alec would
presumably go to. If you need a sweetener of any kind, emphasizing our enthusiasm for following up on this would be
good. AM"
4056,"DUP has gone behind closed doors at Stormont and the smart money is on them emerging at some point supporting the
deal.
There was movement today on the ancillary issue of government support for the Presbyterian Mutual Society, a savings
and loan that lost a lot of money and whose investors didn't get the same financial crisis protections as those in other
institutions. DUP members are pointing to that as enough of a carrot to change their posture on the policing and justice
deal.
Brown and Cowen are poised to go to NI tomorrow. Will keep you posted."
4057,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, February 21, 2010 7:42 PM
H
Shaun
H: Just talked to Shaun. He wants to know if, given your schedule, and in addition to your meeting with him, you can have
dinner with the two of us either Tuesday or Wednesday. Sid"
4058,"over. Sid
will do as soon as I hear"
4060,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, February 21, 2010 7:55 PM
Re: Shaun
Tues good. Fahrenheit restaurant at Ritz in Georgetown very quiet and fine. People don't know about it. so just let me
know."
4061,"Shaun just called (7 pm EST) to report 100 percent unanimous support in DUP for Peter Robinson's recommendation to
complete devolution. The deal will be agreed with the two PMs at Hillsborough tomorrow morning, 8:15 am (London time).
If you wish you may call Shaun. You can reach him through No. 10 Downing St switchboard. Gordon will mention your
role tomorrow at the event. Hooray! Sid"
4062,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, February 21, 2010 8:06 PM
Re: Shaun
Yes 7 pm ok or do you want another time?"
4063,We have remarks for you. I recommend calls to PR and MM before you do the press.
4064,FYI
4065,Ok
4067,"PM and Taoeiseach will announce deal around 9.30 gmt tomorrow after a plenary of all the parties. I recommend you
do a treaty room statement early tomorrow our time. Will send proposed remarks in a few minutes.
Also recommend you call Shaun tonight if you're available."
4068,And to you too
4069,"You should prepare a statement for tomorrow, noting the relevance for other places"
4070,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, February 4, 2010 8:00 PM
Abedin, Huma
Statement
This will be cleaned up a bit, but here you go:"
4071,"She is on her cell.
###"
4073,"Barbara haig — Alexander Haig's daughter / Called to say thank you for the statement that you made. Her father really
respected you. He would been so happy and humbled about what you said. Barbara works for the Nat'l Endowment
for Democracy and says she is grateful for what a help you have been to them, too.
###"
4074,"To long standing conflicts that may appear far from resolution, ethnic and social divisions, peace is possible, and the US
will never give up and always play constructive role"
4075,"sbwhoeop
Monday, February 22, 2010 5:40 PM
H: Just fyi. What's going around...Les Gelb... Sid
ambling Over Rahm
by Leslie H. Gelb
February 22, 2010 I 3:26pm
-
L - Alex Brandon / AP Photo Leslie H. Gelb's call for White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel to
be reassigned spurred a circle-the-wagons reaction from pro- (or perhaps even anti-) Rahm forces.
Gelb sifts the fallout for clues.
When you write that the president of the United States should replace his chief of staff, someone will fire back. So it was
that Rahm Emanuel apparently struck back at my piece last week on the Daily Beast through a column in Sunday's
Washington Post. Only this time, the return fire had a rare twist, one that could produce Washington convulsions. It was
seemingly aimed at me (and others who published suggestions of Emanuel's limitations as chief). But whether it was
intentional or not, the volley actually struck the president himself.
Here is the story, a very Washington tale of stretching permissible criticism of power holders, of pungent media leaks, of
labyrinthine speculation as to who is doing what to whom.
Maybe the leaker thought the way to get rid of Rahm completely was to brand him as a ""traitor"" to the boss.
With a headline ""Replace Rahm,"" I wrote last Tuesday that Emanuel lacked the managerial skills, discipline, and strategic
ability to get things done as chief of staff. I argued he should be moved over to a political adviser slot, where his
considerable, can-do talents would better serve his boss. I targeted others as well, mostly in Mr. Obama's Chicago crowd.
Several writers also blasted this crowd, mostly with unsigned bullets, but never crossed the red line calling for their
removal. I wrote the piece because it essentially reflected the waves of anti-White House staff critiques breaking over
Washington, but rarely heard outside its drawing rooms. I did it because I believed the president was running out of
chances to succeed and needed better and tougher staffers. I did it because if he failed, the nation failed.
Then came the inevitable blast back, a devastating leak, in a piece by Dana Milbank, a respected Washington journalist.
Interesting that the leaker selected Milbank. He's sort of a half-reporter, half-columnist who roams the entire capital city,
not just the White House. The leaker must have felt safe because Milbank has so many sources all over town, making the
leakers harder to trace.
The Milbank headline read: ""Why Obama needs Rahm at the top."" It began: ""Let us now praise Rahm Emanuel. No,
seriously."" Then, he lists me and a couple others who also criticized Rahm. ""But,"" he continued, ""sacking Emanuel is the
last thing the president should do.""
Then, Milbank (and presumably the leaker) delivered the surprise and wounding blow – to the president himself. ""Obama's
first year fell apart in large part because he didn't follow his chief of staffs advice on crucial matters. Arguably, Emanuel is
the only person keeping Obama from becoming Jimmy Carter.""
Then, Milbank (and the leaker) took his first shot, not at me, but at congressional liberals and everyone in the Chicago
crowd except Rahm. ""Obama's problem,"" Milbank continued, ""is that his other confidants—particularly Valerie Jarrett and
Robert Gibbs, and, to a lesser extent, David Axelrod—are part of the Cult of Obama. In love with the president, they
believe he is a transformational figure who needn't dirty his hands in politics.""
So, it was ""their"" fault—until you see the real blow landed beyond them and on the President himself. ""The president
would have been better off heeding Emanuel's counsel,"" but instead ""overruled"" him on several key Rahm
recommendations: not rushing to close Guantanamo and bringing terrorists to U.S. prisons, not trying Khalid Sheikh
Mohammed in New York, and going for a smaller health care bill focused on popular items with Republican support. ""The
result was,"" Milbank wrote, ""as the world now knows, disastrous."" In other words, Mr. Obama could have thrived and
saved himself on key issues had he only listened to Rahm.
It sure looks like Rahm (or someone near and dear to him) trying to save himself at the president's expense. This is an
incredibly unusual leak, seemingly a chief of staff undermining his own boss, the president. Worse, it details specific
advice Rahm personally gave Mr. Obama in the absolute privacy of the Oval Office. Presidents go crazy at such breaches
of confidence.
Which is why another possibility has to be considered: that Rahm was not the leaker. The leak was so egregious, so anti-
Chicago crowd minus Rahm, so devastating to the president, that Emanuel couldn't have been stupid enough to leak a
story where he was the sole, surviving hero. Remember, too, that my piece did not recommend kicking Rahm out of the
White House, just sliding him over into a political adviser job where he could practice small-bite pragmatism. Maybe
someone didn't want Rahm around the White House at all, in any position. Maybe the leaker thought the way to get rid of
Rahm completely was to brand him as a ""traitor"" to the boss. Maybe the leaker belonged to that contingent of self-
mutilating liberal Democrats who have always viewed Rahm as too centrist and pragmatic.
Of course, I don't know what's afoot. And of course, Milbank put his own views into his own article. But someone gave him
the specifics, the precious ammunition about Rahm's private advice to Mr. Obama. The story is not over.
Leslie H. Gelb, a former New York Times columnist and senior government official, is author of Power Rules: How
Common Sense Can Rescue American Foreign Policy (HarperCollins 2009), a book that shows how to think about and
use power in the 21st century. He is president emeritus of the Council on Foreign Relations.
URL: http://www.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2010-02-22/rumbling-over-rahm/p/"
4076,Will aim for robinson and Mccue for 745 one after the other. Ok?
4077,"Car bomb explodes in Northern Ireland
Republican dissidents suspected after blast outside courthouse in Newry as evacuation was taking place
• Buzz up!
• Diqg it
• Mark Tran
• quardian.co.uk, Tuesday 23 February 2010
• Article history
A car bomb exploded last night outside the courthouse in Newry, Northern Ireland, police said. There were no initial
reports of any injuries in the blast.
Police said the vehicle was abandoned at the front of the building in the Co Down town at around lOpm. Officers were in
the process of evacuating the area when the car exploded.
Suspicion is bound to fall on republican dissidents opposed to the peace process. The incident comes only days after a
mortar bomb failed to detonate outside a police station in the nearby Co Armagh village of Keady.
The chairman of the nationalist SDLP in Newry, Gary McKeown, condemned those responsible. ""Lives could have been
lost as a result of this bombing,"" he said. ""It serves absolutely no purpose and does nothing for the community, or the
cause of a united Ireland. If people want to advance their beliefs, they should enter the democratic process and debate
with their political opponents, rather than resorting to violence. Planting bombs outside courthouses will achieve nothing.""
Earlier this month, police on both sides of the Irish border launched separate operations against dissident republicans.
Police in Northern Ireland arrested two men and a woman in connection with the murder of Constable Stephen Carroll, the
first PSNI officer killed by terrorists in the province.
The Continuity IRA shot the 48-year-old policeman dead on a housing estate in Craigavon, County Armagh, on 9 March
last year. His murder came just 48 hours after the Real IRA killed two British soldiers outside the Massereene barracks in
Antrim. In September police discovered a massive 600lb bomb in the south Armagh village of Forkhill.
On Sunday, Republican Sinn Fein, political allies of the Continuity IRA, claimed masked undercover soldiers carried out
surveillance on two housing estates in Lurgan, Co Armagh, in recent weeks. They claimed the men were scouting the
areas in white civilian vans. Republican Sinn Fein said the soldiers belonged to the Special Reconnaissance Regiment.
The alleged presence of SRR soldiers — formerly known as the 14th Intelligence Unit — is controversial because British
troops are meant to have been pulled off the streets, especially in nationalist areas.
Britain heading for hung parliament
Guardian/ICM poll
Tories might not win election outright, suggests new survey
• Comments (259)
• Buzz up!
• Digq it
• Julian Glover
• quardian.co.uk, Monday 22 February 2010 18.30 GMT
• Article history
The Conservatives should no longer count on winning the election outright, according to a Guardian/ICM poll published
today.
The new survey suggests Britain is on course for a hung parliament amid faltering public support for David Cameron's
party.
The opposition have also lost ground on key policy issues, including the economy, and in particular may be losing their
campaign against Labour's so-called ""death tax"". Labour leads the Tories by eight points as the party with the best policy
on care for the elderly.
The two parties are neck and neck on their ability to sort out the economic crisis, against a nine-point Tory lead when the
question was last asked in August 2009.
With no more than three months to go until polling day, the Conservatives have fallen to 37%, down three on last month's
Guardian/ICM poll and down two on another ICM poll earlier this month.
The party has not fallen so low in an ICM poll since the tail end of the banking crisis, last falling to 37% in February 2008.
As recently as last October the Tories hit 45% in an ICM poll and the party will be alarmed by this latest evidence that the
race is tightening, which confirms the findings of some other recent polls.
Meanwhile Labour's support, at 30%, is eight points up on its absolute ICM bottom last May, and slightly above its
average for the second part of last year. However, there is no sign of either a boost for the party following Gordon Brown's
Piers Morgan interview or a fall after this weekend's reports about Brown bullying his staff.
Labour's support is up one point on the last Guardian/ICM poll and unchanged from the most recent ICM poll. Research
began last Friday and most was carried out before the serialisation of Andrew Rawnsley's book in yesterday's Observer,
which may have affected Labour support. Around a fifth of responses were collected on Sunday.
Nick Clegg's hopes of a powerful place in a hung parliament are also boosted by today's poll, which puts the Liberal
Democrats on 20%, unchanged from the most recent ICM and down one on last month's Guardian poll.
All this suggests that Labour and the Lib Dems are holding steady while the Conservatives lose some ground to smaller
parties, which are on a total of 13%. Nationalists are on 5%, Ukip and the Greens on 3% each and the BNP on 2%.
Estimates of what these shares would mean for the parties on polling day vary, but a 7% lead is at the margins of what
the Tories think they need to win a majority. One academic calculation suggests the result would leave Labour only 25
seats behind the Tories in a hung parliament, although any improved Tory performance in marginal seats would offset
that.
• /CMResearch interviewed a random sample of 1,004 adults by telephone on 19-21 February 2010. Interviews were
conducted across the country and the results have been weighted to the profile of all adults. ICM is a member of the
British Polling Council and abides by its rules"
4078,"Northern Ireland agrees power-sharing deal
Gordon Brown hails historic deal which will see justice and policing powers be devolved to Stormont from 12 April
• Henry McDonald
• quardian.co.uk, Friday 5 February 2010 11.42 GMT
•
Gordon Brown, the DUP leader, Peter Robinson, and Sinn Fein's Martin McGuinness (I to r) talk to the press after the
Northern Ireland power-sharing deal was announced. Photograph: Julien Behal/PA
Justice and policing powers will be devolved to Northern Ireland's power-sharing government from 12 April in a historic
deal agreed by the main parties that ""opens a new chapter"" after decades of violence, Gordon Brown said today.
Standing alongside his Irish counterpart, Brian Cowen, at a press conference at Hillsborough Castle outside Belfast, the
prime minister said the ""inspirational"" agreement between Sinn Fein and the Democratic Unionist party (DUP) was a
foundation for lasting peace.
The deal — finally agreed to by the DUP last night and described as a final piece in the jigsaw after a long search for
peace — comes after two weeks of round-the-clock negotiations and brings an end to fears that the power-sharing
government might collapse.
It will see policing and justice powers devolved from Westminster to the assembly within weeks and includes new plans
on overseeing parades.
Brown, who travelled to Belfast this morning, said the agreement had been possible because of ""a new spirit of mutual co-
operation and respect"".
The deal meets a key Sinn Fein demand and prevents the republican party from walking out of the power-sharing
executive. In return, the DUP has secured reforms to the way loyalist marches are handled in Northern Ireland, including
the abolition of the Parades Commission, a body most unionists regard as biased in favour of nationalists.
A cross-community vote will now be held in the Stormont assembly on 9 March before the policing and justice powers are
devolved from London on 12 April.
Brown told reporters: ""The achievements have been as great as they are inspirational. This moment and this agreement
belongs to the people of Northern Ireland, all of the people, and now more than ever before so does their future ... This is
the last chapter of a long and troubled story and the beginning of a new chapter after decades of violence, years of talks,
weeks of stalemate.""
Cowen praised both unionists and nationalists for making ""fair and balanced compromises"" to bridge the divisions and
said the quality of the negotiations meant that the ""devolved institutions can and will work"".
The Northern Ireland secretary, Shaun Woodward, said the deal would further isolate republican dissidents who have
launched three separate gun and bomb attacks against police stations in the province over the last 10 days. The deal
would ""absolutely"" make Northern Ireland a safer place, he said.
The DUP leader, Peter Robinson, said the agreement ""will be more enduring because of the time spent"" in forming it.
Referring back to the Belfast Agreement of 1998 when negotiations bore fruit at the 11th hour, the Sinn Fein president,
Gerry Adams, described the current deal and the rescue of power-sharing as ""yet another very good Friday"".
Jeffrey Donaldson told the Guardian the DUP's 36-strong assembly team was now unanimously in favour of the deal.
But the Ulster Unionist party (UUP) has yet to officially back the package which will allow the assembly to set up
legislation to change the way parades are judged.
A UUP spokeswoman said members wanted to see the proposed agreement before giving their response to the two
governments. ""We have not had sight of this agreement and until we do we will not be signing up to it,"" she said.
The talks, which centred on Hillsborough Castle, outside Belfast, are the longest set of continuous negotiations held in the
near 20-year peace process. Sinn Fein had accused the DUP of stalling on the transfer of policing powers for the last
three years and it was feared that failure to find agreement could see the collapse of the power-sharing government led by
the two parties.
The agreement finally came near midnight at Stormont's parliament building. Earlier in the evening Sinn Fein had said the
basis of a deal was on the table and it was giving the DUP leadership the time to persuade its party to accept it. Robinson
emerged from a meeting of party colleagues to confirm that he had secured unanimous support for the proposals. Earlier
in the week up to 14 DUP assembly members had opposed a proposed deal because it did not give unionists enough
concessions.
Robinson said he would now look to gain the support of the community and the smaller assembly parties for the deal. ""We
have a basis upon which we can go forward and recommend it [the deal] to our party, to the other parties in Northern
Ireland and to the community.
""An essential element of the Democratic Unionist Party's manifesto is the requirement for community confidence; we
believe this can be the basis for gaining that confidence.""
However the leader of the hardline Traditional Unionist Voice (TUV), Jim Allister, questioned why the 14 DUP rebels had
changed their minds.
""The deal hasn't changed, only the snowmen of the DUP, who melted once the heat came on,"" Allister said.
The DUP now faces a struggle to ward off the TUV threat in the forthcoming general election: Allister will portray the deal
as a sell-out of unionist principles and a sop to republicanism."
4079,FYI. Seeking info.
4080,Assume you know about this?
4081,It has been prepared- ready for your signature tomorrow.
4082,"Mark
Thnx for the offer to help on Expo. I can send you the full list tomorrow. Would be happy to download in the am.
Dell, Intel, Microsoft (and about 20 others) all in but HP is not and Ford despite our best efforts keeps turning us down -
they are the only major global auto company not represented in Shanghai (Blanchard and Gephardt going back at them
yet again this week). Oracle, Alt, ADM, Monsanto, and financial and insurance companies among the other logical
companies not in yet.
Will call you in the am
Kris"
4083,Not yet. Will keep tabs.
4084,"sbwhoeop
Friday, February 5, 2010 7:11 AM
H
Re: Bravo! Brava! Issue your statement! Sid
Will find out. Why not invite uk and irish ambassadors to State to brief press with you today?
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
4085,"Take credit and announce Kelly taking next step, etc Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
4086,Interesting. Slight change of tone.
4087,"Fyi below
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Tuesday, February 23, 2010 7:38 AM
FW: Rio Group-Haiti
Declassify on: 02/23/2020"
4088,"Yes, will connect with Jake now on remarks as prepared"
4089,"I am checking on Bill Burns right now -- Huma has the best update on the WH tonight. Sid knows we may need to push
dinner a bit too.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
4090,"UAE with Bill -- 11:15am-11:45am in Bill's office. You could join after you finish up with Shaun Woodward at 11:30am.
Lunch with UAE starts at 12pm.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
4091,"Pretty good stuff!
Robinson and McG have confirmed to speak with you.
In his remarks, Brown indicated that you would host an investment conference this spring. Declan believes this is much
too soon. We might try to steer it to you meeting with Robinson and McG this spring — ie in a few weeks time -- with an
eye toward an investment conference once it is well prepared.
I think we are okay waiting an hour to do the statement, but we'll work to get excerpts out. Kamala announced that you
are speaking at 830."
4092,"Sure. In touch with Claire about timing.
Jeffrey Feltman
Assistant Secretary
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs
Department of State
202-647-7209"
4093,"I have a good story for you on this. Your 830 statement will be first react. But I will have them release excerpts of your
statement now."
4094,"Ambos at event would praise your role
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
4095,"Brown mentioned you and your role. Kamala was there at their invitation representing you. She told everyone that you
would speak at 830."
4096,"This did not occur to me. I'm not sure it's a good idea -- there has been a heavy emphasis on how this deal was made in
NI. Calling Declan for his take."
4097,"DecIan thinks bad idea because sends wrong message to NI and because this is your moment.
Philippe thinks practically impossible to do."
4098,Fyi
4099,Fyi
4100,"Here is what Brown said:
Let me thank the American Government for their unstinting support -- especially Secretary of State Clinton, her efforts
over these last few weeks. And Presidents Obama, Bush and Clinton. And we particularly welcome Secretary of State
Clinton's initiative today that she will host a Northern Ireland Investment Conference this spring."
4101,He just called in again asking if you could talk
4102,Sure. I am available.
4104,Same here.
4105,"7:55 am ARRIVE State Department
8:00 am COFFEE w/JEFF IMMELT AND INDRA NOOYI
8:30 am Secretary's Outer Office
8:30 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Conference Room
8:45 am MEETING ON THE SHANGHAI EXPO
9:30 am Secretary's Outer Office
9:30 am PRIVATE DROP-BY w/ ""WILL-I-AM""
9:40 am Secretary's Outer Office
9:45 am
9:50 am
PHOTO OP
Treaty Room
9:55 am DEPART State Department *En route Dirksen Senate Office Building
10:10 am ARRIVE Dirlcsen Senate Office Building
10:15 am PULL-ASIDE MEETING w/SENATORS LEAHY AND GREGG
10:25 am 105 Dirksen Senate Office Building
10:30 am TESTIMONY BEFORE SENATE APPROPRIATIONS SUBCOMMITTEE
12:30 pm (t) ON STATE AND FOREIGN OPERATIONS
192 Dirksen Senate Office Building
12:35 pm (t) DEPART Dirksen Senate Office Building
En route Russell Senate Office Building
12:40 pm (t) ARRIVE Russell Senate Office Building
12:40 pm RIBBON-CUTTING CEREMONY FOR THE DEPARTMENT'S
12:50 pm SENATE LIAISON OFFICE 189 Russell Senate Office Building
12:50 pm DEPART Russell Senate Office Building *En route Capitol Building
12:55 pm ARRIVE Capitol Building
1:00 pm LUNCH w/SENATOR BARBARA MIKULSKI
2:00 pm Senator's Dining Room
2:05 pm DEPART Capitol Building *En route Dirksen Senate Building
2:10 pm ARRIVE Dirksen Senate Building
2:30 pm TESTIMONY BEFORE SENATE FOREIGN RELATIONS COMMITTEE
4:30 pm (t) 419 Dirksen Senate Office Building
4:35 pm (t) DEPART Dirksen Senate Office Building *En route State Department
4:50 pm (t) ARRIVE State Department
4:55 pm OFFICE TIME
5:40 pm Secretary's Office
5:40 pm MEETING w/RICR, JACK AND JAKE
6:00 pm Secretary's Office
6:15 pm DEPART State Department *En route Bibiana Restaurant
6:30 pm ARRIVE Bibiana Restaurant
6:30 pm PRIVATE DINNER w/MADELEINE ALBRIGHT Bibiana Restaurant
8:00 pm (t) DEPART Bibiana Restaurant *En route Private Residence
8:15 pm (t) ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
4106,fyi
4107,"So nice - congrats to you and thanks for all the work you are doing.
cdm"
4109,"Hillary:
I met with Holbrooke today on water. Pakistani military called it their third most important strategic issue. Great
worries about India/Pakistan tension over 1960 agreement that regulates Indus River. We agreed our teams will work
together, most likely through the World Bank supporting the Abu Dhabi Dialogue, which brings together representatives
from the seven countries that share the Indus River Basin. This is the best forum we know of where India and Pakistan
can meet to discuss water issues. In the context of the shared waters memo and chart I gave you last week, this ranks as
potentially one of the most conflict prone, and one where the US should engage to get the parties to work together.
We are advancing well in developing a policy/action plan for you to announce on World Water Day on March 22.
Safe travels to Latin America, so glad you are going.
Maria
Under Secretary of State
for Democracy and Global Affairs
Department of State
2201 C St. NW Room 7261
Washington DC 20520
202- 647-6240"
4111,"""Our view is that the negotiations that have been taking place between Turkey and
Armenia offer a positive path for the future. Anything that would impede the
success of those discussions and negotiations I think is objectionable and I
would just leave it there.""
--Secretary Gates, News Conference, Ankara Turkey, 2/9/10 (Response to
question: Do you think it will be helpful to US-Turkish relations if the Armenian
Genocide Resolution passes?)"
4112,"Sorry -- just seeing. Ryabkov called for Ellen this morning and they are set to talk at 1030. Plan is for her to deliver same
message and go to Geneva this evening."
4113,"9:00 am DEPART Private Residence
En route Rayburn House Office Building
9:00 am CONFERENCE CALL w/PREP TEAM
En route Rayburn House Office Building
9:20 am ARRIVE Rayburn House Office Building
9:30 am TESTIMONY BEFORE HOUSE FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE
12:15 pm 2172 Rayburn House Office Building
12:20 pm DROP-BY w/CONGRESSWOMAN DIANE WATSON
12:30 pm 2358A Raybum House Office Building
12:30 pm HOLD/LUNCH
12:55 pm 2358A Rayburn House Office Building
1:00 pm TESTIMONY BEFORE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS SUBCOMMITTEE
3:00 pm FOR STATE, FOREIGN OPERATIONS AND RELATED AGENCIES
2359 Rayburn House Office Building
3:05 pm DEPART Rayburn House Office Building
En route State Department
3:25 pm ARRIVE State Department
3:30 pm OFFICE TIME
4:30 pm Secretary's Office
4:30 pm MEETING w/ RICHARD HOLBROOICE
5:15 pm Secretary's Outer Office
5:30 pm MEETING vv./ADMIRAL MIKE MULLEN, CHAIRMAN JOINT CHIEFS
6:00 pm OF STAFF Secretary's Office
6:00 pm MEETING w/DENNIS ROSS (I)
6:30 pm Secretary's Office
6:30 pm DEPART State Department
En route Private Residence
6:40 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
4114,"•
• EUROPE NEWS
• FEBRUARY 25, 2010
Obama Advisers to Aid Tories' Election TV
Battle
By IAIN MARTIN
Advisers close to U.S. President Barack Obama have been drafted by David Cameron to help the Conservatives in their
election campaign against Gordon Brown and Labour.
The Tories have signed a contract with Squier, Knapp, Dunn Communications—a Washington-based Democrat-leaning
political consultancy— to help them prepare for the first-ever television debates between leaders during a British election
camialin.
David Cameron
The firm also is expected to offer some advice more broadly to the Tory leader on the Conservative campaign in the lead-
up to voting, likely to take place on May 6.
Opinion polls have suggested a narrowing of the gap between the two main parties—with the Conservative lead cut to six
to seven points in the two most recent polls earlier this week.
A Conservative spokesman confirmed Wednesday night that Squier, Knapp, Dunn will act as consultants for the television
debates.
Anita Dunn, one of the firm's senior partners, was hired by Mr. Obama in 2006 ahead of his run for president and was the
communications director at the White House until November. Bill Knapp, another senior partner and veteran of the
successful Obama campaign, is a close adviser to the mayor of New York City, Michael Bloomberg.
Tory campaign insiders say they have been talking to the firm for several months after a recommendation from Mayor
Bloomberg, who retains close links with the British Tory leadership.
He was a lifelong Democrat who switched to the Republicans when he first ran for mayor.
The British general election is taking on a particularly American flavor, with the prime minister also understood to be
seeking advice from a consultant based in the U.S. The Times of London reported that Joel Benenson, a polling and
strategy adviser who worked on the team that readied Mr. Obama for the American TV debates, is helping Mr. Brown.
None of the British parties has experience of leaders' debates and as a consequence are looking outside for help.
However, it is the decision of the Tories to reach out across the traditional ideological divide to senior Democrats that is
surprising. Their party usually has looked to Republican strategists for advice, with Labour and the Democrats retaining
close links.
Ms. Dunn is a veteran of Democrat politics, beginning her career in Jimmy Carter's administration and subsequently
working as a consultant on many election campaigns. She returned to the White House with President Obama but left late
last year when her husband, Robert Bauer, the president's personal attorney, was unveiled as the incoming White House
counsel.
Mr. Knapp made television ads for the Obama campaign, has worked on five presidential campaigns and played a leading
role in Mayor Bloomberg's three election wins.
The pre-election atmosphere in the U.K. has become increasingly fraught, with the parties trading blows on allegations of
bullying inside No. 10 Downing Street made in a new book on the Labour government by journalist Andrew Rawnsley.
In the latest developments, the prime minister Wednesday in a GMTV breakfast television interview denied that he had
known about briefings by some of his aides against Alistair Darling, his chancellor of the exchequer.
In a remarkably frank interview Tuesday with Jeff Randall of Sky News, Mr. Darling said that when he remarked in the
summer of 2008 that the worst global recession in 60 years was underway, No. 10 had ""unleashed the forces of hell.""
Mr Brown said on GMTV: ""I was never part of anything to do with this. Look, this was the most amazing time.. .and lots of
things were happening in this time. But I would never instruct anybody to do anything other than support my chancellor,
and I think Alistair will confirm that.""
At a rowdy Prime Minister's Questions in the House of Commons Wednesday, Mr. Cameron questioned Mr. Brown on the
row.
Write to lain Martin at iain.martinwsi.com
Copyright 2009 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved"
4115,"She is staying a few more weeks b/c it lets her retire.
Lona already has been at work per an earlier email from me I forgot on a party for her and picked a date that works for
you and her."
4116,And your statement is out
4117,fyi
4118,"Wasn't meant that way. Meant as sarcasm. Hoagland dislikes McD, thinks he's a problem.
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
4119,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, November 29, 2009 12:20 PM
H
Re: Another memo on backdrop to this week. Sid
8119110,
RELEASE
IN PART B6
Did you read nyt lead editorial yesterday?
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
4120,Declan urges that you be somewhat vague w invites to PR and MM and steer clear of inv conference
4121,"I am traveling outside of the country, with intermittent access to my email. If you need to reach me urgently please
contact Nora Toiv, Toivnf@state.gov, 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych, laszczychj@state.gov, 202-647-5548.
Thank you
cdm"
4122,What is mullen's first name?
4123,"Importance: High
See email chain below about media coverage of Afghanistan. I will work with SRAP to be sure we have a Haiti-like plan
in place for Afghanistan.
jmis"
4124,"http://www.suntimes.com/2072121,desiree-rogers-quits-022610.article"
4125,"October 27, 2009
For: Hillary"
4127,Calling you
4128,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, February 5, 2010 8:24 AM
H
Fw:
There may be hope ... See traffic"
4129,"http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/feb/05/northern-ireland-police-powers-agreement
Brown hails 'new chapter' in Northern Ireland
as end to years of violence
Promise of US investment follows 'momentous' agreement that seals power-sharing framework
• Henry McDonald, Ireland correspondent
• quardian.co.uk, Friday 5 February 2010 19.11 GMT
•
X
British and Irish PMs endorse power-sharing deal Link to this video
Northern Ireland's leaders have been rewarded with the promise of a new US investment programme after securing a
historic deal today which saved power sharing.
Gordon Brown and his Irish counterpart, Brian Cowen, flew into Northern Ireland to put their seal of approval on the deal,
which will create a Department of Justice, gives unionists concessions on the issue of Protestant parades and saves the
power-sharing executive from collapse.
Brown said the achievements over the longest period of unbroken negotiations since the peace process began 16 years
ago were inspirational.
""This is the last chapter of a long and troubled story and the beginning of a new chapter after decades of violence, years
of talks, weeks of stalemate.""
Tonight the White House said Barack Obama saw the deal as ""an important step to greater peace and prosperity for all
communities on the island.""
Obama would also meet Cowen, the DUP leader and first minister Peter Robinson and the deputy first minister, Sinn
Fein's Martin McGuinness, in Washington on St Patrick's Day next month.
Earlier, Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state, said the agreement between the DUP and Sinn Fein was a ""shining
example to other parts of the world locked in religious and ethnic conflicts"".
As a result of the deal, she said: ""The people of Northern Ireland are poised to build a thriving society on this stronger
foundation.
Our economic envoy, DecIan Kelly, will continue to help Northern Ireland reap the dividends of peace, including economic
growth, international investment and new opportunities. -
In the near future, Declan and I will host first minister Robinson and deputy first minister McGuinness in Washington.""
The Irish prime minister said the agreement reached ""presents a real opportunity to renew the partnership which is the life
blood of the devolved institutions. The people of Northern Ireland yearn for this constructive partnership to deliver tangible
outcomes that improve their lives.""
Referring back to the Belfast agreement of 1998, Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president, described today's agreement as
""yet another good Friday."" After reaching an agreement just before midnight on Thursday, the parties in the Northern
Ireland assembly must now vote to put the compromise package in place. They will vote on 9 March to devolve policing
and justice powers, which will then create a justice ministry on 12 April — a key Sinn Fein demand throughout these
negotiations.
Under the agreement, a six-member working group, appointed by Robinson and McGuinness, will formulate a framework
for handling contentious marches and the phasing out of the Parades Commission.
The new body will encourage local people to find solutions to parading problems, with the rights of marchers and
residents taken into account. It will complete its work within three weeks, when the Northern Ireland executive will transfer
responsibilities for parading legislation from Westminster and table a new bill based on the group's proposals.
An executive working group will be set up, in the hands of the SDLP and Ulster Unionists, to improve the way the power-
sharing cabinet is run. Robinson and McGuinness will address issues still outstanding from the 2006 St Andrews
agreement that led to the DUP-Sinn Fein deals. These include legislative measures to protect the rights of Irish language
speakers.
Ian Paisley Jr, the North Antrim assembly member and son of the DUP's founder, described the agreement as a ""win for
unionism"".
Paisley said his party had negotiated the end of the Parades Commission, which most unionists regard as biased in
favour of nationalists. He added that unionist critics of the deal had ""no alternative except the imposition of joint authority
from London and Dublin"".
Mindful of attacks on the DUP by the hardline Traditional Unionist Voice, Robinson said: ""There are some who will play
politics with this agreement, but the real focus in the months to come must be on building an administration at Stormont
that our whole community identifies with and supports.""
Jim Allister, the TUV leader and a former DUP MEP, said he was ""relishing the prospect"" of a general election contest
with his former party. Allister will stand for the TUV in Ian Paisley Sr's North Antrim constituency.
""In football terms I see this result as a five to one win for Sinn Fein. They get their date for policing and justice. Secondly,
their veto can be exercised over the justice ministry. They now have working party on Irish language. North/South bodies
are strengthened. And finally there is a stronger north-south parliamentary forum. The DUP only get a view of parading
issues.
""Sinn Fein are laughing all the way to the next staging post,"" he said.
Shaun Woodward, the Northern Ireland secretary, said the deal was bad news for republican dissidents determined to
destabilise the power-sharing government.
He said a powerful message was being sent out to the dissidents that there are now ""two groups of people who were once
terrible rivals [who] have found a way through a very big challenge"".
But the Real IRA, Continuity IRA and Oglaigh na hEireann are unlikely to be moved by the accord at Hillsborough. In the
past seven days the republican dissidents have carried out three gun and bomb attacks on police stations across
Northern Ireland.
Republican sources have told the Guardian that the groups are likely to intensify their armed campaigns when policing
and justice powers are transferred to Belfast."
4130,We're here next door and about to check in w cdm.
4131,"FYI --
Reid: Shelby Has Hold On All Nominees
Friday, Feb. 5, 2010
Sen. Richard Shelby, R-Ala., has placed a blanket hold on all executive nominations on the Senate calendar in an effort
to win concessions from the Obama administration and Pentagon on a variety of fronts affecting his home state, according
to aides to Senate Majority Leader Reid.
Reid spokeswoman Regan Lachapelle said Shelby is blocking more than 70 pending nominations. Reid can force a vote
on any nomination by filing cloture.
Because of the time required to vote on multiple nominations, the Senate processes most nominations by unanimous
consent. Any one senator can block any of those nominations by objecting to a unanimous consent request to take it up.
The nominations will remain stalled unless Reid files cloture.
While holds are frequent, Senate aides said a blanket hold represents a far more aggressive use of the power than is
normal.
""He should not be holding up 70-plus nominees for a parochial issue,"" a Democratic aide said. ""They're qualified and they
should be moving forward.""
Disclosure of the blanket hold came after two days in which top Democrats voiced mounting frustration with Republican
holds on executive nominees.
'We've got a huge backlog of folks who are unanimously viewed as well qualified -- nobody has a specific objection to
them -- but end up having a hold on them because of some completely unrelated piece of business,"" President Obama
said Wednesday in a televised meeting with Senate Democrats.
On the Senate floor Thursday, Reid, Senate Majority Whip Durbin, Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy and
Senate Armed Services Chairman Carl Levin ripped Republicans for holds on national security nominees and judges.
Reid, who kept the Senate in pro forma session over recent holidays to prevent former President George W. Bush from
making recess appointments, said he has grown so frustrated he might advocate such appointments, which the president
can make when the Senate is out of session.
'What alternatives do we have?"" Reid said on the floor Thursday. ""What alternative do we have?""
Earlier in the day, a spokesman for Shelby said the senator has placed holds on ""several pending nominees due to
unaddressed national security concerns,"" including frustrations with the Air Force's handling of the competition for an
aerial refueling tanker. The spokesman did not respond to later requests for comment about the blanket hold.
Northrop Grumman Corp. and EADS, the European consortium behind Airbus, and Boeing Co. are vying for the high-
stakes contract, potentially worth $40 billion. The Northrop/EADS team would build the planes in Mobile, Ala., but has
threatened to pull out of the competition unless the Air Force makes changes to a draft request for proposals.
""Nearly 10 years after the U.S. Air Force announced plans to replace the aging tanker fleet, we still do not have a
transparent and fair acquisition process to move forward,"" the spokesman said. ""The Department of Defense must
recognize that the draft request for proposal needs to be significantly and substantively changed.""
Defense Secretary Gates Wednesday told House lawmakers the Pentagon plans to issue the final request for proposals
soon, and will proceed with the program whether or not there is a competition.
""Obviously we would like to have a competition for it, and we hope that both companies will agree to participate, but we
will move forward,"" Gates said. ""We have to have new tankers.""
In addition to the tanker issue, Shelby's spokesman said he is frustrated that the Obama administration won't build an
Alabama-based FBI center to analyze improvised explosive devices.
Shelby secured a $45 million earmark in the FY08 omnibus appropriations bill for a Terrorist Explosive Device Analytical
Center to be set up at the Army's Redstone Arsenal.
""Sen. Shelby will continue to work with the FBI to give them the capability to coordinate intelligence as well as forensic
and technical exploitation related to IEDs, but this administration's coddling of terrorists makes this an uphill effort,"" the
spokesman said. ""He has made the administration aware of these concerns and is willing to discuss them at any time.""
Also Thursday, Vice President Biden said he was so frustrated by Republican foot-dragging that he was considering
whether Senate rules should be changed.
""There's a little disappointment in that it seems like the only way to do business up here anymore is with a supermajority
on almost everything,"" Biden said moments after swearing in Sen. Scott Brown, R-Mass., who gives Republicans 41
votes, enough to filibuster on any issue.
'What I have been doing is spending a lot of time having my staff go back and scrub this, you know, the use of the
filibuster and how it's worked,"" Biden said. ""This is not a constitutional requirement.""
Biden defended the 60-vote requirement, calling it ""a useful tool. It's legitimate, but from my perspective having served
here, having been elected seven times, I've never seen a time when it's become sort of standard operating procedure. ...
Requiring a supermajority is just not a good way to do business.""
by Dan Friedman and Megan Scully"
4132,"My hair is getting whiter by the minute watching these reports of your trip to Pakistan. I know you'll do a smart job but
be very cautious as well-- I need you both in excellent shape to see ME on Nov 6 at your DC event. Love, Betsy Sent
from my Verizon Wireless BlackBerry"
4133,"They may seek Geithner's co-signature on the letter, if they can get him while he's in Canada snow-boarding. You can't
make this stuff up."
4134,"I just spent an extra hour explaining the architecture of the IHRC/HDA.
They had misconstrued it to be something that wjc now could not do b/c of his new un role.
We can discuss.
Will fill wjc in on the plane.
I hear it's snowing - won't likely make it back to dc until sun or mon"
4135,You are s000 lucky!!!
4136,"Soaring cost of healthcare sets a record By Noam N. Levey February 4, 2010 Los Angeles Times
Spending was 17.3% of the economy last year. The share paid by the U.S. will soon exceed 50%, a study says.
In a stark reminder of growing costs, the government has released a new estimate that healthcare spending grew to a
record 17.3% of the U.S. economy last year, marking the largest one-year jump in its share of the economy since the
government started keeping such records half a century ago.
The almost $2.5 trillion spent in 2009 was $134 billion more than the previous year, when healthcare consumed 16.2%
of the gross domestic product, according to an annual report by independent actuaries at the federal Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS, scheduled for release Thursday.
The nonpartisan accounting agency also projected that as early as next year, the country could mark another milestone
as government picks up more than half of the nation's total healthcare tab for the first time.
The rise in current costs, driven in part by surging spending in Medicare and Medicaid, and the bleak projections for the
future do not take into account changes that may come if Democrats revive their healthcare overhaul legislation.
The report appears likely to fuel further debate about the health bills now stalled in Congress.
In the absence of change, the report raises a grim prospect for the country -- a healthcare system consuming an ever
greater and potentially unsustainable share of the economy even as private health coverage lags.
Last year, CMS estimated that government spending on healthcare would not overtake private spending until 2016,
compared with 2011 or 2012 in the current report.
""The health system is hurting, and we are seeing that in these numbers,"" said Karen Davis, president of the
Commonwealth Fund, a leading authority on healthcare policy.
The report also points up the financial cost of the so-called Great Recession and the growing pressure it is putting on
state and local governments.
Federal and state spending on Medicaid, the nation's primary health insurance program for low-income Americans,
jumped nearly 10% in 2009, according to the report. Medicare spending, meanwhile, shot up just over 8%.
Obama and many healthcare experts have argued that reshaping the healthcare system will ultimately make it more
efficient, even if overall health spending continues to increase -- a claim Republicans dispute.
Fueled by new technology, an aging population, rising incomes and other changes, spending on medical care has been
consuming a larger and larger share of the nation's economy for years, jumping from about 5% of the gross domestic
product in 1960 to nearly 14% in 2000.
But the recession that began in 2007 accelerated that trend, as the economy contracted while healthcare spending
continued to increase, according to CMS.
Even now, with the economy slowly recovering, the government expects that the growth of healthcare spending will
outpace the expansion of the economy. By 2020, 1 of every 5 dollars spent in the U.S. is expected to go to healthcare.
Some economists believe that this is not necessarily a problem, as the healthcare industry can provide good jobs and
improve both health and productivity.
But there is growing concern that as much as a third of the medical care delivered in this country does not help patients.
""Are we getting value for the dollar? That is the question,"" said Len Nichols, health policy director at the centrist New
America Foundation. ""If you believe that so much medical care is unnecessary, as I do, then it is criminal that we are
spending so much.""
Stuart Butler, vice president for domestic and economic policy at the conservative Heritage Foundation, said that the
numbers underscore the need for more aggressive action to curb spending.
""The only way to do this is to simply spend less,"" Butler said, warning that the health bills being pushed on Capitol Hill do
the opposite.
CMS officials noted that healthcare spending has been increasing even as the number of Americans without health
insurance is growing, another sign of problems with the system.
""With higher unemployment, people lose their jobs [and] many of them lose their healthcare coverage in the process.
And under current law, they don't have much to fall back on,"" said Richard S. Foster, chief actuary.
Foster said that the report by his office indicated that two of the main trends driving calls for a health overhaul -- rising
costs and shrinking numbers of people with health coverage -- are essentially the same as they were when the
healthcare debate began last year.
""Nothing much has changed in that regard,"" he said.
Inefficiency is becoming a particularly acute problem for state and federal governments, which the report shows are
increasingly supporting the nation's healthcare system.
Half a century ago, government accounted for just a quarter of all healthcare spending. Now, as the cost of caring for
elderly and poor Americans swells, government's share of the total bill is fast becoming greater than that of the private
sector.
The trend accelerated in the recession, as Washington spent billions of dollars to help states prop up Medicaid programs
being strained by the growing ranks of the unemployed and uninsured.
The healthcare legislation being debated on Capitol Hill could increase the government commitment to healthcare as
the federal government boosts the Medicaid program and provides billions of dollars of subsidies to low- and moderate-
income Americans to help them buy insurance.
But in a separate report a month ago, CMS actuaries estimated that the Senate healthcare bill would boost total
healthcare spending by less than 1% over the next decade, in large part because the legislation includes initiatives to
make Medicare more efficient."
4137,"ANGOLANS TO VOTE IN 2012, PRESIDENT MAY EXTEND TERM(SBU) Constitutional revisions signed by President dos
Santos abolish direct presidential elections and would allow dos Santos to remain in power until 2022, according to
press. The Angola desk comments the move is a step backwards for democratic reform, and adds the changes shuffle
the government, keeping Foreign Minister dos Anjos in office but removing Defense Minister Paihama. (Ops/Angola
desk telcon, Reuters"
4138,you?
4139,"you?
Actually he called back and took the earlier time of 9:30. So strobe, lobo, patino, mubarak. Then u can decide on johnnie
and alec ross."
4140,"EU leaders to debate Blair presidency on
summit sidelines
Climate talks overshadowed by divisive subject of Tony Blair's candidacy to be Europe's first president
European government chiefs gather in Brussels this evening for a summit likely to be the first occasion to broach the
divisive subject of Tony Blair's candidacy to be Europe's first president.
The topic is not formally on the agenda of a meeting that will be dominated by wrangling over climate change funding and
how to get the Czech president, Vaclav Klaus, to add the final signature to the reformist Lisbon treaty. But senior
diplomats predicted there would be intense private discussion on the fringes of the summit over the question: who will get
the plum job of first sitting president of the European council, the pre-eminent EU forum that brings leaders together for
summits at least four times a year.
David Miliband, the foreign secretary, said today that Blair would give Europe a ""strong voice"" on the global stage, but his
comments were seized on by his Conservative shadow, William Hague, who said the debate over the presidency proved
that the UK should have held a referendum on the Lisbon treaty.
Officially, the job does not exist until Klaus finalises Czech ratification of the treaty, expected within weeks. While Blair
personally has kept quiet about his ambitions, the British government is campaigning increasingly assertively on the
former prime minister's behalf.
""We will be making the case for a strong, internationally known figure who can open doors in [foreign] capitals,"" said an
official. ""There is only one candidate.""
That was not a reference to Jean-Claude Juncker, the veteran Luxembourg prime minister and European fixer, who is the
only contender so far to have openly declared his candidacy. He emerged this week as the anti-Blair.
Juncker looks certain to fail in his bid for the top job. But he may well succeed in destroying Blair's chances, being viewed
as a stalking horse who will vanish to make way for a third unknown contender.
While the Blair debate rages on the sidelines of the summit, the big priority for the Swedish government chairing the
meeting is to try to break a deadlock on EU funding of climate change programmes in the developing world ahead of the
Copenhagen conference in December.
Berlin and Warsaw are the keys to a deal, but the prospects for a breakthrough look dim. Fredrik Reinfeldt, the Swedish
prime minister, warned that Europe's credibility on global warming was at stake.
In recent weeks European governments have locked horns over the financing package and have been unable to reach
agreement. The aim is to come up with pledges of an EU fund of up to €15bn (£13.4bn) a year by 2020 for transfers to the
developing countries to combat global warming. The overall package is central to a Copenhagen deal.
But with the other big players, especially the US, which is reluctant to commit to a figure, Germany believes Europe
should not show its hand until the Copenhagen negotiations. The European commission and others such as the UK and
the Scandinavians believe agreeing on a figure in advance would strengthen Europe's global leadership role on climate
change and send a strong signal to other potential signatories.
The Poles and other eastern Europeans are unhappy at being asked to stump up for developing countries such as Brazil,
which is wealthier than the poorer EU members. The Poles are refusing to agree a package and figures for Copenhagen
unless it is first decided how the bill will be split among the EU's 27 governments. In the midst of a financial crisis, the
eastern Europeans say they cannot afford the climate change fund.
Angela Merkel, sworn in yesterday for a second term as German chancellor, will be pivotal to any climate change
financing deal and her answer to the Blair question may also be decisive. So far, she has been hedging her bets.
While Nicolas Sarkozy, the French president, is known to support Blair with reservations, there are no German candidates
for the two big new jobs being created under Lisbon — the European president and a European foreign minister or high
representative for foreign and security policy.
In Paris last night the French and German leaders discussed the posts, although there was little information on whether
they reached a pact. Sarkozy said the two leaders agreed on ""almost everything"".
Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg — all said to nurse ambitions to secure the presidential post
themselves — have come out publicly against Blair on the grounds that he would neglect the interests of smaller EU
member states — 19 out of the total 27.
Adding his voice to the argument, Demitris Christofias, the president of Cyprus, said a council president ""from a small
country would be more objective and more consensual. The European Union is a family of compromises.""
The Dutch centre-right prime minister and possible contender, Jan-Peter Balkenende, has come under pressure this week
to renounce European presidential ambitions since his move to Brussels could trigger early elections and the fall of his
government.
Christofias emphasised that tonight the priority would be to get the Klaus blocking of the Lisbon treaty lifted rather than
focusing on who gets what under Lisbon.
Senior diplomats agreed it was too early to discuss names. If Klaus signs thetreaty soon, a special summit would be
convened next month to decide on the president and foreign minister, also leaving the European commission chief, Jose
Manuel Barroso, to put together a new team."
4141,"you?
Coming over secure fax at 9am."
4143,"RELEASE
IN PART
B6
sbwhoeop
Sunday, November 29, 2009 12:24 PM
H
Re: Another memo on backdrop to this week. Sid
McD v unpopular with key members of press was so incensed by his dealings that he nearly wrote a
column on it. People collecting string. Hoagland chief among them Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
4144,"I copied it to memo on chilcot but will resend in an hour when I'm home. But check Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with
Blackberry"
4145,"sbwhoeor
Sunday, November 29, 2009 1:0S PM
H
Re: Another memo on backdrop to this week. Sid
November 28, 2009
Editorial
Diplomacy 101
We were thrilled when President Obama decided to plunge fully into the Middle East peace effort. He appointed a skilled
special envoy, George Mitchell, and demanded that Israel freeze settlements, Palestinians crack down on anti-Israel
violence and Arab leaders demonstrate their readiness to reach out to Israel.
Nine months later, the president's promising peace initiative has unraveled.
The Israelis have refused to stop ail building. The Palestinians say that they won't talk to the Israelis until they do, and
President Mahmoud Abbas is so despondent he has threatened to quit. Arab states are refusing to do anything.
Mr. Obama's own credibility is so diminished (his approval rating in Israel is 4 percent) that serious negotiations may be
farther off than ever.
Peacemaking takes strategic skill. But we see no sign that President Obama and Mr. Mitchell were thinking more than one
move down the board. The president went public with his demand for a full freeze on settlements before securing Israel's
commitment. And he and his aides apparently had no plan for what they would do if Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
said no.
Most important, they allowed the controversy to obscure the real goal: nudging Israel and the Palestinians into peace
talks. (We don't know exactly what happened but we are told that Mr. Obama relied more on the judgment of his political
advisers — specifically his chief of staff, Rehm Emanuel -- than of his Mideast specialists.)
The idea made sense: have each side do something tangible to prove it was serious about peace and then start
negotiations. But when Mr. Netanyahu refused the total freeze, President Obama backed down.
Mr. Netanyahu has since offered a compromise 10-month freeze that exempts Jerusalem, schools and synagogues and
permits Israel to complete 3,000 housing units already under construction. The irony is that while this offer goes beyond
what past Israeli governments accepted, Mr. Obama had called for more. And the Palestinians promptly rejected the
compromise.
Washington isn't the only one to blow it. After pushing President Obama to lead the peace effort, Arab states, especially
Saudi Arabia, refused to make any concessions until settlements were halted. Mr. Mitchell was asking them to allow Israel
to fly commercial planes through Arab airspace or open a trade office. They have also done far too little to strengthen Mr.
Abbas, who is a weak leader but is still the best hope for negotiating a peace deal. Ditto for Washington and Israel.
All this raises two questions: What has President Obama learned from the experience so he can improve his diplomatic
performance generally? And does he plan to revive the peace talks?
The president has no choice but to keep trying. At some point extremists will try to provoke another war. and the absence
of a dialogue will only make things worse. Advancing his own final-status plan for a two-state solution is one high-risk way
forward that we think is worth the gamble. Stalemate is unsustainable."
4148,"Oscar, can u print this asap for hrc. Its for her 9:30am call. Thx."
4150,"The Secretary's Phone Call with Egyptian President Mubarak
Background: S/E Mitchell met with Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit and EGIS Chief Omar Solimon on January 24 in Cairo.
While Solimon responded positively to S/E Mitchell's request that Egypt encourage Palestinian President Abbas to agree
to proximity talks, Aboul Gheit asserted that the Palestinians should not agree to any form of negotiations until Israel
has taken action on the ""five steps"" requested by the Palestinians. Aboul Gheit then hosted a meeting on February 3
with Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat and Jordanian FM Nasser Judeh, which Solimon attended in part. Egypt and
Jordan agreed to support the Palestinians entry into proximity talks, but the three sides also agreed that Abbas would
seek U.S. views on two questions: 1) The terms of reference for the proximity talks and 2) Whether the U.S. would
present its own bridging proposals on final status issues or simply serve as a conduit for the parties' positions. Deputy
Envoy David Hale met with Abbas on February 5, during which Abbas indicated flexibility on both the terms of reference
(he would accept a general formula based on language from the Roadmap) and on the U.S. role. You should emphasize
that it is critical that Abbas agree to begin proximity talks immediately to lay the foundation for negotiations that will
realize Palestinian aspirations for an independent and viable state."
4151,"Ok great! We'll do ecuador now cause otherwise we lose him.
So pinato, mubarak, lobo."
4152,"RELEASE
IN PART
B6"
4155,"So qatar and saudi?
Yes or no to bahrain?"
4156,"You are congratulating him on becoming foreign minister, and purpose is to establish a personal relationship with him.
Trying to get u call sheet, its classified....
Lobo call not happening today."
4157,"Sorry I mean pinato
He's not available
Heard u got lobo."
4158,We'd have to come up with something. Which we can.
4159,"The team proposes to put out the following statement in Ian's name tonight. We are weighing a recommendation to put
out a statement in your name tomorrow.
We commend the Honduran people for having exercised peacefully their democratic, sovereign and inalienable right to
select their leaders. The apparently large and enthusiastic turnout shows that given the opportunity to express
themselves, the Honduran people have viewed the election as an important part of the solution to the political crisis in
their country.
We look forward to continuing to work with all Hondurans and encourage others in the Americas to follow the lead of
the Honduran people in helping advance national reconciliation and the implementation of the Tegucigalpa-San Jose
Accord. Significant work remains to be done to restore democratic and constitutional order in Honduras, but today the
Honduran people took a necessary and important step forward."
4160,"POLITICS d,.dby MARC AMBINDER
« The Sunday Shows In Five Bullet Points I Main
Nov 29 2009, 9:13 pm by Marc Ambinder
A Last-Minute Meeting On Afghanistan
President Obama convened a last-minute meeting of his national security team tonight to discuss the language that his
administration will use to describe its new strategy for Afghanistan. Two administration sources confirmed that the
meeting, which began at 5:oo pm, included cabinet officials like Defense Secretary Robert Gates. The officials would not
describe the meeting and said that no other news organizations were being given any background briefing. That suggests
that the meeting was akin to a pre-game rally session by the commander-in-chief: he wants to gert everyone from Gates to
Gen. Stanley McChrystal to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on the same page before the president's Tuesday speech.
Before young officers at West Point, Obama will announce his decision about Afghanistan to an increasingly skeptical
nation and a Democratic Congress that is threatening to condition its budgeting on identifiable off-ramps and
timeframes. Obama is expected to announce that he'll order several Army combat brigades to Afghanistan -- about
30,00o troops in all, most of them to be tasked with more rapidly standing up Afghanistan's indigenous army. His speech,
as described in broad terms by advisers last week, will be short and serious. His challenge is to persuade Americans that
the war in Afghanistan is winnable, as Americans tend to give their presidents significant leeway so long as they believe
that the president is confident in his strategy. Officials said last week that while would outline a clear exit strategy, he
would not tie troop withdrawals to any specific political developments in Afghanistan, which might run into opposition
from Democrats in Congress, who are demanding benchmarks. Nor is the President likely to impose direct conditions on
Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai. An official said that Obama plans to try explain the interconnection between the the
stability of Pakistan and the nexus of terror in Afghanistan. An explanation that the American people would accept has
proven elusive.
Permalink :: Comments (0) TrackBacks (0) :: Share"
4162,FYI
4163,Aboul gheit just called to follow up on mubarak call. Do you want to take it?
4164,Call sheets should have been in your call sheet folder. Not sure what happened.
4165,Yes
4166,Thanks. I think we're getting her points all covered.
4167,"sbwhoeoP
Saturday, February 6, 2010 10:51 AM
H: Distant early warning. Sid
hrc memo DEW 020610.docx
February 6, 2010
For: Hillary"
4168,"February 6, 2010
For: Hillary"
4169,"To say thank you for your message. She said she doesn't need a call back but was very thankful for your message,"
4170,"fyi
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, January 5, 2010 9:13 PM
FW: Daniel Yohannes
B6"
4172,"Will do. Before the plan was simply to have GB present and Cameron to respond. I'm trying to figure out what the
element of surprise is adding here."
4173,"RELEASE IN
PART B6
Affectionately, Gina"
4174,"FYI. The latest thinking is that this would be a Clinton-Ashton statement. We'll make sure you have a chance to
see/approve final, and we can work to incorporate any changes you have now."
4175,"Here is a new top. We will add the point about how much we actually spend on foreign aid (vs what people think we
spend) a little later in the speech. Wanted to get this to you to see if it is going in the right direction. Am also faxing to
you.
Development / New Top"
4176,"It took 19 hours but I got home at noon today.
I can talk at 830pm tonight if that works for you? I cam also do tomorrow am.
Cdm"
4178,"Text not set. Among other things, they're still working through whether to mention detainees."
4179,How about 830am?
4180,Getting on a 9:30pm call - can I call you after?
4181,I'll tell him...
4183,Sorry. I was driving in so didn't see your message when you sent it. You should have the new draft from Megan by now.
4186,Great idea. I wonder if we should also try to get it published in Foreign Affairs or something equivalent.
4187,Agreed. We are doing so. Looks like tomorrow or Sat
4188,I will prepare for you to sign today.
4189,We will put together a list of members and have the letters ready for you to sign today.
4190,fyi
4191,Fyi
4192,"I noticed on your schedule that you are meeting with a number of tech CEO's this evening. Google should be an obvious
co-sponsor of the USA Pavilion and they have consistently pushed us off. Although they bring up IP issues as a reason
not to participate, the Chinese frequently note that they do a lot of business in China. We are now at $54 million. If the
opportunity arises, it would be helpful to note the importance of a USA standing in Shanghai."
4193,fyi
4194,Fyi
4195,"HRC:
Huma reminded me that you wanted to get a more structured agenda for your weeklies with Susan. I will work on that
over the next few weeks.
For tomorrow, Erica anticipates she will likely want to discuss the following items:
In addition to what Jake may add, think you should raise:"
4196,"Fyi
B6
_"
4197,"Sullivan, Jacob i <Sullivanil@state.gov>
Thursday, January 7, 2010 9:45 PM
Mills, Cheryl D; H
Abedin, Huma
Re: Potential Topics Susan Rice Weekly
I've pinged Jim for anything on his list. B5"
4198,FYI
4200,"At airport, flying to LA. Landing around 3 p.m. Available for a few minutes now on"
4201,"I will be out of the office until Tuesday, January 19."
4202,"Strobe Talbott
Monday, January 18, 2010 8:39 AM
H
Re: All praise on Haiti
Fine. Will check for message on arrival at 3 DC time."
4203,"sbwhoeop
Saturday, January 9, 2010 9:42 AM
H: Succinct summary on NI situation at this moment. Details to follow later. Sid
January 9,2010
The First Lady, her young lover, and a scandal
that could hand power to Sinn Fein
David McKittrick reports on the far-reaching consequences of
Iris Robinson's infidelity
The mesmerising saga of the toyboy, the Northern Ireland First Minister and his straying wife threatened to engulf
Belfast's frail political settlement last night.
Following a day closeted with advisers Peter Robinson, head of the Northern Ireland government, broke his silence to
insist defiantly that he would not step down after a day of turmoil. His move is unlikely to stem the clamour for an inquiry
into an affair which has fused the political and the sexual. First indications are that members of his party, the Democratic
Unionists (DUP), are reacting to the disclosures with strong disapproval. The party is highly religious and lays heavy
emphasis on Christian family values. It is also currently highly nervous that the revelations could cost it seats in the
coming Westminster election. If the DUP were to fracture as a result of the scandal it could lead the way to Sinn Fein
becoming the largest party in the Northern Ireland Assembly - allowing it to nominate its own first minister and putting the
peace process in jeopardy.
Disclosures in a BBC television programme on the activities of his wife, Iris, who has exited from public life, led to a day-
long flurry of political calls for inquiries into the Robinson family.
Mr Robinson stands accused of failing to notify the authorities that his wife had been involved in financial transactions
without declaring an interest. She helped a 19-year-old ""toyboy"" lover to set up a business.
Mr Robinson said he had asked for the appointment of a senior counsel ""to ask me any questions he or she wishes to
ask, and to give an opinion as to what I should have disclosed or whether I have breached an obligation"".
Insisting he had done nothing wrong, Mr Robinson accused the BBC of broadcasting ""smears and innuendo"". Saying that
he did not rule out a defamation action, he declared: ""I am being tried in the court of public opinion.""
Sinn Fein's Martin McGuinness, who is Deputy First Minister, said he was shocked at the BBC revelations and is seeking
talks with both Mr Robinson and Gordon Brown. Mr McGuinness was publicly sympathetic when news of the scandal
broke, but his veering towards a tougher line is taken as indicating a calculation that Mr Robinson may not survive the
storm.
Mr Robinson, who has been First Minister for 18 months, is regarded as a pivotal figure in the peace process since he
was prepared to follow the Rev Ian Paisley into government with Sinn Fein.
But the state of the political settlement has appeared increasingly rocky as Mr Robinson has resisted pressure from
almost all points of the political compass to complete devolution by accepting a transfer of responsibility for policing from
London to Belfast.
His reluctance to move on the policing issue was attributed to nervousness about challenges from hardline opponents in
the Westminster general election. Now opponents are speculating that it might instead have at least partly been due to the
family scandal which has just become public but which he knew of for months.
In recent days Mrs Robinson dramatically announced that she was leaving politics. She is currently Westminster MP for
east Belfast, a councillor and a member of the Belfast Assembly. Yesterday there were calls for her to depart immediately
and stop drawing her salaries.
These reflected the fact that, while her husband might have a faint chance of political survival, her behaviour is regarded
as inexcusable.
She had been a friend of Kirk McCambley's father, Billy. Before he died, he asked Mrs Robinson to look after his son. The
BBC programme, Spotlight, revealed that her relationship with Kirk had developed into a sexual one. It said she
suggested to him that he go into a business venture which was partly organised by Castlereagh council, where she is an
alderman.
She is said to have obtained £50,000 from two property developers, to be used to set up the business. She is also said to
have helped approve the McCambley proposal without declaring a financial interest. The council said yesterday it was
investigating.
The young man was interviewed for the programme. So too was Mrs Robinson's one-time political adviser Selwyn Black,
a former Methodist minister, who gave the BBC access to 150 text messages allegedly sent to him by Mrs Robinson.
Among those calling for a public inquiry yesterday were Jim Allister of Traditional Unionist Voice, a hardline critic of Mr
Robinson. He said the issues in the programme must be addressed ""with utter transparency and candour"".
Ulster Unionist leader Sir Reg Empey called for Mrs Robinson's immediate resignation, saying: ""It is clear that Iris
Robinson's continuing position as an MP, Assembly member and councillor is utterly untenable. She should resign all her
positions with immediate effect.""
He added: ""It is also unfortunately the case that the office of the First Minister is embroiled in these matters. My party will
study the events outlined by the BBC and the very serious allegations that have been made with regards to the conduct of
the First Minister. Inevitably the appropriate authorities will be required to investigate the allegations made against the
First Minister.""
* Northern Ireland Secretary Shaun Woodward refused to speculate about Mr Robinson's future.
But he said: ""It is a responsibility on everyone in the Assembly to understand that the consequences of allowing the
political process to slide would undoubtedly have an impact on the broader canvas.
""And that if anybody were to be selfish enough to think this is a moment when that can be allowed to be put in the deep
freeze, even some may wish to unpick, they would be extremely irresponsible, foolish and would be playing very, very
dangerous games.""
Speaking to BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Mr Woodward said that the First Minister had to be allowed the opportunity
to clear his name.
But he went on: ""I'm very conscious of the fact that while all that is happening, he is First Minister and the business of
devolution, the business of the Executive must go on.
""I hope he will be able to resume the responsibilities as First Minister to ensure that the work of the Executive continues
and that includes the talks on policing and justice devolution."" PA"
4204,"I will work with her on specifics and get more info to you. She is an expert on Pakistan more than Haiti but obviously
knows about the threat of child exploitation in these situations. Will see what we can find out."
4205,"Great. I wonder if the problem has something to do with the fob system. Will let you know what I find out.
Jm"
4206,Ok
4207,Ok
4208,"Vernon just called to invite you and the President to lunch at his home - january 30th in honor of the Alfalfa Dinner.
Lona - Please let me know when you respond and can you get this request to appropriate person on President Clinton's
staff?
Many thanks.
Sent from my mobile device"
4209,Thought we had already regretted.
4210,"We have regretted the official dinner and the pre-Alfalfa luncheon that John Hamre organizes -- I believe this is
separate?"
4211,"http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/columnists/guest_contributors/article6991697.ece
From The Times
January 18, 2010
Fear of the poor is hampering Haiti rescue
American views rule among the rubble of Port-au-Prince.
That's one reason aid is taking so long to get to those in need
Linda Polman
Aid workers have already baptised the earthquake in Haiti a ""historical disaster"". It will rate high in the annals of the
humanitarian aid world because of the number of victims and scale of the destruction. But the rescue operation is also
becoming notorious for the slowness with which aid is reaching the victims. Five days after the quake hit, many places are
still largely bereft of international aid.
Not through lack of funds, supplies or emergency experts. Those are all pouring in from dozens of countries. But most of
the aid — and aid workers — seems stuck at the airport.
Rescue teams have pulled survivors from five-star hotels, university buildings, a supermarket and the UN headquarters,
all in Port-au-Prince's better neighbourhoods. In poor areas, where the damage appears much greater, apparently
forgotten victims report on Twitter that they have yet to encounter the first foreign rescuer.
Many aid workers are reported to have orders not to venture out without armed guards — which are not there at all, or
only after long debates with the UN military command. The UN has lost a number of staff in the quake, and is not keen to
risk more lives.
But the Haitian people seem to scare aid workers more than Somali warlords, Darfuri Janjawid or Afghan Taleban.
Frightened Dutch aid workers abandoned a mission without•reaching the collapsed building where people were trapped,
and frightened doctors have left their patients unattended.
The experience of CNN's medical reporter, Dr Sanjay Gupta, is telling. In a makeshift clinic he encountered a Belgian
medical team being evacuated in a UN bus. UN ""rules of engagement"" apparently stopped them providing security for the
doctors. The Belgians took most of their medical supplies with them, to keep them out of the claws of robbers.
Dr Gupta and his camera team stayed the night, monitored the abandoned patients' vital signs and continued intravenous
drips — and they were not robbed. Some rescuers are leaning so much toward security that they will allow people to die.
The media are not helping. CNN rules in the rubble. ""Outside of a military conflict, this is our biggest international
deployment since the tsunami in 2004,"" according to Tony Maddox, the managing director of CNN International. So the
image of the aid operation being beamed back is primarily Ameridan — and one of the big problems is the American view
of Haiti.
CNN won't stop telling aid workers and the outside world about pillaging (the incidence of which — for the first four
frustrating days at least — did not compare with what happened after Hurricane Katrina) and about how dangerous it is to
distribute food, because of the likelihood of ""stampedes"".
Nor is the US Government, the biggest player in the aid operation, doing anything to help to relax the atmosphere. On the
contrary. When President Obama said that the US aid effort would be ""aggressive"" he meant it. The humanitarian
operation is not led by civilian agencies, but by the Pentagon.
Mr Obama ordered 9,000 troops and a fleet of nuclear-powered ships to move in. Victims of the war in Congo (which has
cost five million lives in the past years) and of the genocide in Darfur would love so much American attention — but it is
Haiti's fate to lay in America's backyard and to have been a sore to American eyes for decades already.
One, perhaps even two million Haitians already live in the United States, but more try to come. Every day dead Haitian
refugees wash up on Miami's sunny beaches. Haiti is a constant pain for US taxpayers who feel that the billions of dollars
that have been poured in should have at least lifted the country out of its position as one of the poorest places on Earth.
Even when the earthquake struck, investigations were taking place into the fate of several million dollars of aid funds, sent
to victims of a hurricane that hit Haiti in 2008, that have disappeared.
Furthermore, to the horror of many godfearing Americans, voodoo is an officially recognised religion in Haiti. And, perhaps
above all, Haitians are poor and black. In the view of some Americans those two add up to ... murderous gangs.
The invasion of soldiers and humanitarian workers at the airport of Port-au-Prince reminds me of the American military
invasion of Haiti authorised by President Clinton in 1994. I'd lived and worked there for almost two years as a
correspondent for Dutch radio. There were 20,000 soldiers but they were surprisingly nervous about what reception the
unarmed Haitians might have in store for them.
It turned out to be a wave of slum dwellers streaming to the air and sea port to greet the American guests. In abundant
conga lines they snaked through the city, tea cosies on their heads to express just how happy they were. ""Liberte! Merci
Beel Cling Dong!"" they shouted. A terrified American GI, still a teenager, saw the mass of pitiful creatures approaching
him, and asked me if the tea cosies were ""some kinda voodoo?"". He calmed down only when a line of BMWs and
Mitsubishis appeared and filed past to watch the invasion.
Where the soldier came from, the owners of vehicles like these are respectable citizens. In Haiti, they are likely to be the
ones smuggling drugs and making US aid dollars disappear. The good guys in Haiti are the defenceless people in the
slums. For Western city dwellers, this is the world turned upside down. ""Back! Back!"" the soldier shouted, aiming his
weapons at the good guys.
The rescue teams that stay put at the airport are one reason why we still don't really know what is going on. Seventy
survivors had been pulled from the rubble so far, the International Red Cross said on Sunday. That's 14 rescues per day
as a joint result of the 1,739 international specialised rescue workers that are there. That number would surely jump if
some of the professional equipment that they brought was made available to the countless groups of local people
desperately digging for victims with their bare hands, day and night.
Let's hope that the food distributors worrying about their safety know that yesterday hundreds of people in Port-au-Prince
dropped to their knees praying outside a warehouse where workers for the agency Food for the Poor had announced that
they would be distributing rice and beans. The crowd allowed children and the elderly to go first in line without having
guns aimed at them first.
Linda Polman's War Games: The Story of War and Aid in Modern Times will be published by Penguin in April"
4212,I will prepare for your signature. Thanks!
4213,"Jonathan Powell suggests that VVJC write an article supporting Tony Blair for EU president in Die Welt, the Berlin
newspaper. If so, I suggest it be wrapped in a discussion on the future of Europe, the need for Europe to be strong as a
partner with US for many goals requiring a strong president: the policy imperatives, from climate change, security, social
integration, etc. point to Blair. Also, if done, should include description and endorsement of Blair's personal Qualities for
office. Can't be backhanded. Jonathan says Tony should call Bill soon. Sid"
4214,agree
4215,"Guardian
sbwhoeop
Thursday, October 29, 2009 7:08 PM
H; Doug Band
fyi: Blair's chances seem to be cratering in EU. Sid
Tony lair's bid for EU residency sinks
Ex-PM's chances of winning role slide as Sarkozy and Merkel fail to back him
• Nicholas s‘tv'at.i. and )an,..Trajf.pf in Brussels
• u!,-„ Thursday 29 October 2009 21.26 GMT
T20.,.:31::.3.1:7's hopes of becoming Europe's first sitting president were receding fast tonight as Britain admitted his chances
of success were ""fading"" after the continent's centre-right leaders made it clear one of their own must have the post.
Hours after G
.nr.4,
,efl Srov.,,h delivered his strongest statement of support for Blair — disclosing that he had spoken to him
earl;er this week — British sources indicated that the former prime minister was unlikely to assume the high-profile. job.
""it would be right to describe Tony's c,hances as fading,"" one British source said.""..slcgles. t.
..aa'r.sa; and are
not terribly enthusiastic. Silvio Berlust.-,oni remains his strongest backer.""
Bialr's expected failure to secure the post of president of the European Council meant that ca,•,-,'et.,
..""it;ity.n-te was emerging
as a serious contender to assume the new post of high representative for foreign policy. The foreign secretary insisted,
however, that.he was ""not available"".
Miliband spoke out as British sources said it had become clear in recent days that Blair would struggle to become
president. The post is likely to be filled in the next month amid signs that the Czech Republic will become the last EU
country to ratify the Lisbon treaty.
Sarkozy, the French president, and Merkel, the German chancellor, are understood to have agreed at a dinner at the
Elysee Palace last night that the new president should be appointed from the main centre-right EPP grouping, which
brings together the parties currently ruling most EU countries.
Brown gave a hint at a press conference that Blair's candidacy was fading when he qualified his strong backing for his
predecessor by stating that there were also other candidates for the job. ""Of course it may not happen and there are other
candidates as well,"" he said.
The prime minister's remarks came after he attended an acrimonious meeting of the European centre-left leaders this
afternoon, shortly before the EU summit in Brussels began.
Brown was understood to have had a tense exchange with Martin Schulz, the German leader of the Socialists in the
European parliament, who wants the left to assume the new foreign policy post, leaving the presidency to the centre right.
Brown told the meeting: ""You need to get real. This is a unique opportunity to get a progressive politician to be the
president of the council.""
But it soon became clear that Blair has no support on the left, let alone on the centre right. Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero,
Spain's centre-left prime minister, for the first time publicly queried the Blair candidacy by announcing that the centre left
across the EU was more concerned with securing the other post of European foreign minister. Zapatero, who will have to
work with the new European figureheads when Spain assumes the Eti's six-month rotating presidency on 1 January, said
the European socialists were clear that they want the post of the high representative. ""There is a preference for the high
representative,"" he said. ""That is rather reasonable.""
A senior Spanish official said this was the first time that Zapatero had ""dropped Blair"" and that the centre-left in the EU
was seeking a deal with the centre-right, led by Merkel. The centre-right would get the job coveted by Blair, while the
centre left would take the foreign minister post. The lack of support for Blair became clear when Jean Asselborn,
Luxembourg's foreign minister, launched a strong attack on him as be emerged from the meeting of Socialist leaders. ""lt is
not about the person of Tony Blair. Now in the United States, Obama is the president, it is no more Mr Bush. We have a
new treaty, we have to reset Europe and we need to start with some new ideas. There is and will remain a link for the next
generation between Iraq, Bush and Tony Blair.""
Downing Street wiil resist criticism that it was wrong to mount such a strong campaign in favour of Blair when it had
become clear earlier this week that his chances were fading.
Brown believes it was right — and in the national interest — to argue strongly for Blair when there was a chance to secure
such a senior post for Britain. Blair, who had a tense relationship with Brown during his decade as prime minister, will be
pleased by the strength of his successor's support.
Brown said today: ""Let me say very clear that we, the British government, believe that Tony Blair would be an excellent
candidate and an excellent person to hold the job of president of the council.
""His international experience is well known, his expertise on environmental, economic and security issues is well known to
everybody throughout Europe as well as known throughout the world If you have the chance for that to happen it is in
Britain's national interest.""
guardian.co.uk Guardian News and Media Limited 2009"
4217,"All good — have communicated some matters to Jake.
RS on board. Will have you call TV when you ret on Weds and can explain when we talk.
Sexton and Marty Edelman will be in UAE as fyi — will tell Huma."
4218,From our dawn friend.
4219,fyi
4220,Assume cdm already shared with u.
4222,Will print too.
4223,"Editorial: Mrs. Clinton in Pakistan
NEW YORK TIMES
October 30, 2009
Hillary Rodham Clinton's first trip to Pakistan as secretary of state was never going to be easy. The day she arrived,
extremists detonated a car bomb at a crowded market in Peshawar that killed at least 100 people. The Nation
newspaper dismissed the visit as a mere ""PR exercise, but who will buy what the US is selling is difficult to imagine,
beyond the already compliant government.""
Polls show that an overwhelming majority of Pakistanis dislike and mistrust the United States. They blame Washington
for using and then abandoning them after the Soviets were driven from Afghanistan. And they resent Washington for
pressing their government now to fight against extremists — and suspect that they will be abandoned again. The fact
that many of the extremists are on Pakistan's territory and threatening Pakistan's government has not shifted that
thinking or mitigated that resentment.
A good part of this, of course, is the failure of Pakistan's government, which has still not adequately explained that this is
not just America's fight. But the United States is also to blame. For eight years the Bush administration coddled the
Pakistani Army at the expense of the rest of society.
Mrs. Clinton challenged Pakistan's government to do more to shut down Al Qaeda, but she was, rightly, determined to
use this visit to also broaden the relationship.
Instead of just courting President Asif All Zardari and the army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, Mrs. Clinton also held
talks with the top opposition leader, Nawaz Sharif; parried questions from an audience of deeply suspicious college
students; met with civil society leaders, including women and Pashtun elders; gave interviews to Pakistani journalists;
and visited religious and cultural sights.
She promised to refocus American aid on the ""needs of the people"" and announced targeted commitments, including
$85 million for microloans for poor women to start businesses and $125 million for the first phase of an electricity
project aimed at reducing blackouts and improving energy conservation.
Those grants are welcome but still small change when compared with a five-year, $7.5 billion — nonmilitary — aid
package approved by Congress and signed into law this year. That package was supposed to demonstrate to Pakistanis
that, this time, the United States is in it for the long haul. Instead, it has become another focus of popular resentment.
The Army and some Pakistani news media whipped that up with disingenuous complaints that the legislation (Islamabad
was consulted beforehand) compromised Pakistan's sovereignty by conditioning disbursement on adequate civilian
control of the military.
If Washington is ever to enlist Pakistan as a reliable ally, it is going to have to do a much better job of explaining itself.
And it is going to have to insist that Pakistan's leaders start explaining the real stakes to their citizens and the real
benefits of an alliance with the United States. Mrs. Clinton's trip was an important start — but only a start."
4224,"Kelly, Craig A <KellyC@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 9:39 AM
H; Valenzuela, Arturo A
Re: Venezuela
Madam Secretary:
I will be in touch with Judith, RI et al.
Best,
Craig"
4225,See below
4226,"Jeffrey L Farrow
Friday, October 30, 2009 2:56 PM
Jacob J Sullivan
Only Palau & Israel vote w/US in UN
RELEASE IN PART
B6
Wed., Palau was one of only two UN General Assembly members to vote with the U.S against a
resolution calling for an end to the US embargo of Cuba (Israel was the other). Even the two
other states in free association with the US. did not support the US position. important officials
in Palau wanted to abstain because of the drastic cut in.U.S. assistance that Alcy Frelick has
insisted on but Pres. Toribiong decided to stick with the US. The proposal to cut the small
amount of assistance that Palau is receiving is ironic in light of the substantial increase in
assistance pledged to the two other freely associated states just a few years ago. It is also
misinformed and misguided.
Jeff
ri;).
ivEtrnlia News
Palau has joined the United States and Israel in voting against a United Nations resolution calling
for an end to the US embargo on Cuba....
n"
4227,"This is not a fair assessment of the position we have taken. We have more than tripled to level of assistance from what
was proposed in the last Administration and have expressed flexibility about how to structure it. Jeff has consistently
been pushing the Palauns to press for more. Kurt reached out to him per your instruction and we will get you a
complete memo."
4228,"Funny timing given Farrow email, which I can discuss further with you."
4230,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, October 30, 2009 8:47 PM
H
RE: Your boss
Look at you getting big praise — I don't even get that!"
4231,"October 31, 2009
For: Hillary"
4233,"Hello! TL, will buzz you on Monday to follow up ..."
4234,Fyi
4235,"Have had 2 sessions since u & I talked, having another Sat afternoon. No particular need for further guidance from u; but
glad to connect at any time. Tks for terrific event in the 4-letter-word fishinf village."
4236,Can u call me
4237,"Ur email must be back up!!
What happened is Judith sent you an email. It bounced back. She called the email help desk at state (I guess assuming u
had state email) and told them that. They had no idea it was YOU, just some random address so they emailed. Sorry
about that. But regardless, means ur email must be back! R u getting other messages?"
4238,Nothing.
4239,"For WJC too.
Good meetings.
Spent about 3.5 hours w/ preval and bellerive.
They are very much on board w/ ihrc/hda and had some comments we can discuss when we talk.
Same on mdtf.
Discussed the political situation and the options they are looking at - quite thorny, particularly in terms of what to do re
constitutional legitmacy.
He's on board w/ a visit on 10 mar w/ dinner w/ you and wjc on 9 mar.
More when we talk - taking off now.
Cdm"
4240,"Dear all:
Otero, Maria <OteroM2@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 9:41 AM
H; Slaughter, Anne-Marie; cheryl.mills
Fuchs, Michael H; Mauldin, Caroline P; Schonander, Carl E; Jones, Kerri-Ann
Re: Water
To update you, at G we have been working on water and World Water Day (the event planned takes place at the
National Geographic Building), since I am taking on water as the key issue I am/will working on. I sent S a memo on
water in December outlining our plans. Note that we are mandated to report to Congress annually as part of the ""Water
for the Poor"" Act.
I have met with Kerri-Ann, with OES ""water"" staff in the last weeks to address this and also with several regional bureau
A/S (Carson, Feltman, Blake so far) on water in the respective regions.
There is a great deal of interest on their part and we have started outlining specific initiatives that we could focus on.
We've also met on the Nile Basin Initiative, with World Bank ""experts"" leading NGOs, McKinsey, etc. I've also spoken to
Raj (USAID allocated about $480 million in FY 2009 to water, and MCC about $500 million) but of course he has been
unable to focus on this. And Cheryl and I haven't spoken yet about Food Security/water.
Best,
Maria"
4242,"Will do.
Valmoro, Lona J <ValmoroU@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 10:43 AM
H; Otero, Maria; Slaughter, Anne-Marie; cheryl.mill
Fuchs, Michael H; Mauldin, Caroline P; Schonander, Carl E; Jones, Kerri-Ann
Re: Water
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
4243,"Hillary:
I had planned to meet with you on water after returning from Bolivia's inauguration - there is so much we can do.
Haiti is beyond what one's spirit can absorb. I am grateful that my former colleagues from ACCION, missing until friday,
are safe.
Best,
Maria"
4245,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 11:26 AM
H
MINUSTAH document
RELEASE IN PART B5"
4246,"Kelly, Craig A <KellyC@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 11:52 AM
H
RE: Venezuela
Best,
ck
SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED"
4247,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 2:26 PM
H; Doug Band; Justin Cooper; cheryl.mills
Mills, Cheryl D
Re: Glad you're there
Diane Reynolds; MMezvinsky
Just leaving the hospital.
Really rough and sad.
Mark Paul and others doing the Lord plus 10 work
I sent Keen an email re no security.
Troops just arrived so the hopefully they will be able to keepb doctors there tonight around the clock.
Cdm
Sent: Mon Jan 18 14:22:08 2010
Subject: Glad you're there
PI give me periodic updates about what you're seeing and doing. Love to all."
4250,Not sure why these came back - scroll down for messages
4251,Scroll down
4252,Fyi
4253,"Today's Dallas Morning News editorial page condemns attorney David Schiller for including you in the wrongful death
suit that he filed on behalf of the Lozado family. It ends with ""... citing Clinton is enough to give even ambulance-
chasing lawyers a bad name."""
4254,"B6
RELEASE IN PART
B6"
4255,"Good Afternoon,
I work as a Help Desk Analyst and it has come to my attention that one of our customers has been receiving permanent
fatal errors from this address, can you please confirm if you receive this message.
Thank you for your assistance,
Christopher
Christopher Butzgy
VES-IRM (POEMS)
202-647-8700
This e-mail is Unclassified based on the criteria of E.O. 12958"
4256,- u can call now
4257,"• oClose Window
• Print this page
From The Sunday Times
February 28, 2010
Gordon Brown on course to win election
David Smith and Jonathan Oliver
GORDON BROWN is on course to remain prime minister after the general election as a new Sunday Times poll reveals
that Labour is now just two points behind the Tories.
The YouGov survey places David Cameron's Conservatives on 37%, as against 35% for Labour — the closest gap
between the parties in more than two years.
It means Labour is heading for a total of 317 seats, nine short of an overall majority, with the Tories languishing on a total
of just 263 MPs. Such an outcome would mean Brown could stay in office and deny Cameron the keys to No 10.
The poll result presents the Conservative leader with one of the greatest challenges of his leadership today as he makes
the keynote speech to his party's spring forum.
In an interview with The Sunday Times, Cameron defied his right-wing critics who believe the party's modernisation has
gone too far. He said: ""Some people say to me, 'Play things safe; try to win by default — the government is in a mess.' I
say, 'No. This is the Conservative party that is offering radical change. I'm doubling up on change'.""
With the expected May 6 election now just over two months away, Cameron will seek to reconnect with voters through a
series of pledges, including a plan to restore discipline in schools. In an echo of the speech that won him the Tory
leadership in 2005, he will address the Brighton conference without notes.
""This is very, very clear,"" he said. ""I've made my choice. There is no going back. This election is about change and we will
be offering change.""
Cameron insisted he was unconcerned about the collapse in Tory support. ""The polls move around a lot,"" he said. ""The
voters tell us that they want change. They want to know the Conservative party itself has changed.""
The narrowing of the Conservative lead has been dramatic and rapid. Until January the Tories held close to a 10-point
lead. But a week ago a Sunday Times YouGov poll put the gap at six points, suggesting a hung parliament, with the
Tories still on course to become the largest party.
In the last election, in 2005, support for the parties generally held steady in the run-up to polling day. YouGov polling for
The Sunday Times showed Labour leads of between two and five points from January through to the June election.
Labour's margin of victory was three points.
In today's poll, Labour has risen two points on the previous week, from 33%, while the Conservatives have dropped two
from 39%. The Liberal Democrats are unchanged on 17%.
The collapse in the Tory poll lead will put pressure on the pound in financial markets tomorrow by adding to fears that a
hung parliament will mean insufficient action is taken to cut Britain's budget deficit.
The last time the gap between the two main parties came this close and the Tory support was so low was in autumn 2007.
That was before Brown's honeymoon ended with his failure to call a snap general election. The Conservatives went on to
peak in May 2008 with a 26-point lead.
Today's poll suggests recent claims about Brown's tantrums and his intimidation of staff may have actually helped him.
Just 28% of people believe the prime minister is a bully and 50% agree he has a ""strong sense of right and wrong"".
The survey disclosed growing concerns about Cameron's elite background and lack of empathy with ordinary families.
Just 25% think that Cameron understands problems faced by ""people like me"", compared with 35% for Brown."
4258,"• oplose Window
I[TA ==.----------
• Print this page
From The Sunday Times
February 28, 2010
Gordon Brown on course to win election
David Smith and Jonathan Oliver
GORDON BROWN is on course to remain prime minister after the general election as a new Sunday Times poll reveals
that Labour is now just two points behind the Tories.
The YouGov survey places David Cameron's Conservatives on 37%, as against 35% for Labour — the closest gap
between the parties in more than two years.
It means Labour is heading for a total of 317 seats, nine short of an overall majority, with the Tories languishing on a total
of just 263 MPs. Such an outcome would mean Brown could stay in office and deny Cameron the keys to No 10.
The poll result presents the Conservative leader with one of the greatest challenges of his leadership today as he makes
the keynote speech to his party's spring forum.
In an interview with The Sunday Times, Cameron defied his right-wing critics who believe the party's modernisation has
gone too far. He said: ""Some people say to me, 'Play things safe; try to win by default — the government is in a mess.' I
say, 'No. This is the Conservative party that is offering radical change. I'm doubling up on change':
With the expected May 6 election now just over two months away, Cameron will seek to reconnect with voters through a
series of pledges, including a plan to restore discipline in schools. In an echo of the speech that won him the Tory
leadership in 2005, he will address the Brighton conference without notes.
""This is very, very clear,"" he said. ""I've made my choice. There is no going back. This election is about change and we will
be offering change.""
Cameron insisted he was unconcerned about the collapse in Tory support. ""The polls move around a lot,"" he said. ""The
voters tell us that they want change. They want to know the Conservative party itself has changed.""
The narrowing of the Conservative lead has been dramatic and rapid. Until January the Tories held close to a 10-point
lead. But a week ago a Sunday Times YouGov poll put the gap at six points, suggesting a hung parliament, with the
Tories still on course to become the largest party.
In the last election, in 2005, support for the parties generally held steady in the run-up to polling day. YouGov polling for
The Sunday Times showed Labour leads of between two and five points from January through to the June election.
Labour's margin of victory was three points.
In today's poll, Labour has risen two points on the previous week, from 33%, while the Conservatives have dropped two
from 39%. The Liberal Democrats are unchanged on 17%.
The collapse in the Tory poll lead will put pressure on the pound in financial markets tomorrow by adding to fears that a
hung parliament will mean insufficient action is taken to cut Britain's budget deficit.
The last time the gap between the two main parties came this close and the Tory support was so low was in autumn 2007.
That was before Brown's honeymoon ended with his failure to call a snap general election. The Conservatives went on to
peak in May 2008 with a 26-point lead.
Today's poll suggests recent claims about Brown's tantrums and his intimidation of staff may have actually helped him.
Just 28% of people believe the prime minister is a bully and 50% agree he has a ""strong sense of right and wrong"".
The survey disclosed growing concerns about Cameron's elite background and lack of empathy with ordinary families.
Just 25% think that Cameron understands problems faced by ""people like me"", compared with 35% for Brown.
Furthermore, only 28% think the Conservative leader wants to do the best for ""all groups in Britain"", against 39% for the
prime minister.
Peter Kellner, president of YouGov, the Sunday Times pollster, said that while individual polls could throw up unexpected
shifts, the recent trend had been for a significant narrowing of the Tory lead.
""Our daily polls should be regarded a bit like the FTSE index: a 100-point rise or fall in a day might be a blip or a trend —
often we can't tell for a few days,"" he said.
""I am confident the Tory lead is down this weekend but I can't promise whether the latest movement will be sustained,
increased or reversed in the days ahead. One of the reasons for doing daily polls is to monitor these fluctuations.""
The Tory lead of 6%, which was first reported in The Sunday Times, was maintained in YouGov's polls in The Sun last
week. The increase in support for Labour on Thursday and Friday, as the latest Sunday Times poll was being conducted,
came as figures showed a strengthening economic recovery.
Under the British parliamentary system, the prime minister remains in office after a general election until he either tenders
his resignation or is defeated in a Commons no confidence vote.
If the election result leaves Labour just short of an overall majority, Brown is likely to battle on, with Labour running the
country as a minority government. The party would seek to do deals with minor parties such as Ulster's Democratic
Unionist party or, if necessary, Nick Clegg's Liberal Democrats, to get its legislation through parliament.
If repeated in a general election on the basis of a uniform swing in all constituencies, today's poll would leave Labour just
nine seats short of the 326 needed for an overall majority in the new 650-seat House of Commons.
The Tories would be well behind on 263 seats, with the Liberal Democrats on 41. Kellner calculated that, even allowing for
a larger swing to the Tories in marginal seats, where the party has spent millions of pounds on campaigning, the poll was
consistent with Labour being by far the largest party.
He suggested that in such a scenario Labour might win 300 seats, with the Tories on 270 and the Lib Dems on 50.
Labour will believe it is benefiting from the upturn in the economy. For the first time in a YouGov poll since July 2007,
before the financial crisis, people trust Labour more than the Tories to run the economy.
YouGov, which began polling after the 2001 election, has developed a reputation for accuracy. Its final Sunday Times poll
in 2005 was precisely right, and it accurately predicted Boris Johnson's victory in the 2008 London mayoral election and
the results of last year's Euro elections.
Contact our advertising team for advertising and sponsorship in Times Online, The Times and The Sunday Times, or
place your advertisement.
Times Online Services: Dating I Jobs I Property Search I Used Cars I Holidays I Births, Marriages, Deaths I
Subscriptions E-paper
News International associated websites: Milkround
Copyright 2010 Times Newspapers Ltd.
This service is provided on Times Newspapers' standard Terms and Conditions. Please read our Privacy Policy.To inquire
about a licence to reproduce material from Times Online, The Times or The Sunday Times, click here.This website is
published by a member of the News International Group. News International Limited, 1 Virginia St, London E98 1XY, is
the holding company for the News International group and is registered in England No 81701. VAT number GB 243 8054
69."
4259,"GTIP is working on it. Also, meant to say that Jillian works on Iran, not Pakistan."
4261,I did email her yesterday to see availability. Will confirm her
4263,"Sorry -- just seeing. In short, they might have made a bad word choice. They should have said ""reconcile"" instead of
""achieve both."" But having done it, they've got to play out the string with the Pals, who would be suspicious of the
change. But if AM says no on Monday, Mitchell is open to changing it. If AM miraculously says yes, then they'll have the
leverage to push it through with BN. Can elaborate on plane.
They didn't admit they made a bad word choice - that's my interpretation."
4264,I actually think it makes sense and may help - so I am happy to nnawigate it for him
4265,"Yes I emailed u back earlier, hope u are not having more trouble.
Have told mario we are switching. Secret service knows. Lona confirming."
4267,We just heard there's no 2. Its 230 or 3. What would you like?
4268,Will do.
4269,"This is old.
She emailed back this am and said she wasn't free."
4270,"Just reached Tom about it. Alerted him to the version as it came to me, including potential of its breaking. He seemed
a) aware of the basis for what I'd heard, b) to share my assessment/concern (though asked me to elaborate, which I did
vividly), and c) prepared to make sure that whatever ready to be is said publicly - and whatever happens diplomatically -
put the kibosh on the version as it came to me.
Incidentally, unbidden by me on both points-i.e., volunteering-he went out of his way to says upbeat things about you
and downbeat things about OMF. Said he wanted to discuss that with me in person. I said nothing of substance, except
always glad to talk.
Over and out, tho would appreciate you're confirming receipt, since I'm not cc'ing anyone on this.
Cha-cha-cha (even though you're not going to Argentina-and rightly so)."
4271,Rob will do a note for you to sign.
4272,"Death toll jumps to 708 after Chile quake: president
SANTIAGO, February 28, 2010 (AFP) - The official death toll for Chile's devastating 8.8-magnitude earthquake and
resulting tsunami jumped Sunday to 708 confirmed fatalities, President Michelle Bachelet told reporters here."
4273,"Button, Case <ButtonWC@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 9:38 PM
Re:
B6
Secretary-
Thank you so much for the well wishes. I have enjoyed working for you (everyday since
and am grateful for another year supporting the work you do.
Thank you again for the note. See you in HST!
Case"
4274,"http://www.publicpolicypolling.com/pdf/PPP_Release_MA_45398436.pdf
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE January 9, 2010
INTERVIEWS: DEAN DEBNAM 888-621-6988 / 919-880-4888 (serious media
inquiries only please, other questions can be directed to Tom Jensen)
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE POLL: TOM JENSEN 919-744-6312
Senate Race Competitive
Raleigh, N.C. — The race to replace Ted Kennedy in the US Senate is looking like a toss
up, with Republican Scott Brown up 48-47 on Martha Coakley.
Brown is benefiting from depressed Democratic interest in the election and a huge lead
among independents for his surprisingly strong standing. Those planning to vote in the
special election only report having voted for Barack Obama in 2008 by a 16 point
margin, in contrast to his actual 26 point victory in the state.
That decline in turnout from Obama voters plagued Democratic candidates for Governor
in Virginia and New Jersey last fall. Beyond that 66% of Republicans say they're 'very
excited' about turning out while only 48% of Democrats express that sentiment.
Brown leads 63-31 with independents and is winning 17% of the Democratic vote while
Coakley receives only 6% support from GOP voters. Both candidates are relatively
popular, with 57% viewing Brown favorably to only 25% unfavorable and 50% with a
positive opinion of Coakley to 42% negative.
Those folks planning to vote in the special election are actually opposed to Obama's
health care plan by a 47/41 margin and only narrowly express approval of the President's
overall job performance 44/43.
""The Massachusetts Senate race is shaping up as a potential disaster for Democrats,"" said
Dean Debnam, President of Public Policy Polling. ""Martha Coakley's complacent
campaign has put Scott Brown in a surprisingly strong position and she will need to step
it up in the final week to win a victory once thought inevitable.""
PPP surveyed 744 likely Massachusetts voters from January 7th to 9th. The margin of
error is +/-3.6%. Other factors, such as refusal to be interviewed and weighting, may
introduce additional error that is more difficult to quantify.
Complete results are attached and can be found at www.publicpolicypolling.com."
4276,"Madam Secretary,
Attached and below, please find a list of the issues I cover.
Thanks,
Mike
MEMORANDUM
TO: Secretary Clinton
FROM: Mike
CC: Cheryl, Jake
SUBJECT: Issues I Cover
In addition to the day-to-day projects and follow-up items I work on with Jake, I cover the following issues:
Long-Range Policy
O Helping Cheryl and Jake plan for, and follow-up on, the bi-monthly policy meetings
O Working with bureaus on end-of-year reports follow-up
O Keeping up to speed on issues discussed at Deputies meetings for weekly memos
O Helping shepherd speech ideas and providing feedback on drafts
Substantive Issue Areas
o Human rights/democracy
O Sudan
O Mexico
o Cookstoves
O Yemen-related issues
O Export controls
O Cybersecurity
O Terrorist finance issues
O Military families issues
O Climate change
• Dialogues and partnerships with Nigeria, South Africa, Angola, Indonesia, Brazil
State Department Reform
• Report reform: Working with Rich Verma and his team on reforming state's system for producing annual reports
to Congress
• QDDR-related assistance"
4277,Will follow up on both. Safe travels!
4279,"Zach talked to me about it last night as well. Will be between april 21st and may 2nd. He will let us know as soon he gets
the date.
Cdm did tell us to hold the 9th at whitehaven so we are doing that."
4280,Yes
4281,Will do.
4282,FYI
4283,Will do.
4284,"Google has been wierd about this whole deal but this whole Espo experience has been fascinating. Some companies will
say absolutely no for months (Qualcomm, Bloomberg, J&J) and then pop out of nowhere and say yes. Others like AU are
in for nd then decide not to give us a penny. Therefore we have to keep bugging these guys.
We WILL raise the money. We are at $54M+ (this wk Hawaii came in for $500k and Bloomberg LLC and need $7M
more. Ideally we would like to raise $10 to 11M to cover any overruns (it's getting more expensive because the US was
so late we are paying more now to build it quicker).
Where it will come from?
A- Right now we have three big companies talking to us in the range of
Haier may go from If two or three come thru big we are done.
each - Monsanto, Disney, and Oracle.
B- We also have a number of other companies like Invitrogen, Hormel, Mattel and Major League Baseball in the
range.
C-Interestingly the cities and states are going to their private funders and trying to raise money on their own to
promote their jurisdictions - Chicago, Houston, Georgia, Montana, TN. (In the past, over 20 states participated with
public funds but current budgets are tough). Maybe a chat w Mayor Bloomberg would be worthwhile. For example, I
spoke to the University of WA and they will probably get benefactors to cosponsor at $250k making them the only
university represented.
D-We have approached groups like Pharma and the fashion industry thru Diane von Furstenburg to get them to bundle
smaller companies and both have agreed to do it. I met w DVL and she wants you to know that she is very excited about
helping (they are in therM range).
E- We have talked to the elusive Chamber of Commerce again about getting SME's to raise $2-3M in smaller increments.
They are contemplating it.
Finally the two obvious industries that are not involved are the banks (and we know why) and the insurance companies
who are starting to look into the market over there.
Anyway, I did not mean to go on and on but that's where we stand and these are the potential areas to tap. We'll get
there.
On your last Q - I too heard that"
4285,"Its not like a traditional trade show/expo with specific booths. It is more subtle and the pavilion folks would negotiate
creatively on what they want..
Depdg on amount, they get on the big wall of contributors, we show multiple scenes of NYC in the shows and displays,
they can use the wonderful VIP lounge/auditorium to have NYC day or week at the Expo - the rockettes, Broadway goes
to China, commercial diplomacy, mtgs betwn NYC and Chinese officials, .getting SME's access to China etc. We could
really be creative.
LA, San Fran, San Antonio already in, chicago on way...
As you know the general theme is ""Better Cities, Better Lives"". How can NYC not be repped? They cam brag about their
innovations."
4286,"I am currently out of the office on official travel and will be checking e-mail periodically. If you need immediate
assistance, please call 202-647-9572.."
4287,"I've already met with him but will follow up again. Have an idea I think he may be able to help with.
Safe travels.
JM"
4288,"As per your suggestion, I spoke with Roy Spence over the weekend and will be meeting with him on Wednesday to
discuss candidates for the International Information programs (IIP) position. Will let you know how it goes.
JM"
4289,"This is the role we discussed
cdm"
4290,"Balderston, Kris M <BalderstonKM@state.gov>
Monday, January 11, 2010 12:43 PM
Abedin, Huma
Ben Feder"
4291,"Haiti that you asked for
Read all the way down (2 emails)
Cdm"
4292,"January 11,2010
For: Hillary"
4293,"Importance: High
FYI"
4294,He was very flexible but this week would be great. We can try and do tomorrow.
4295,All you - will get with lona
4296,"http://www.cbsnews.com/blogs/2010/01/11/politics/politicalhotsheet/entry6084818.shtml?tag=stack
January 11, 2010 6:30 PM
Obama's Approval Rating Dips to New Low
(CBS)
President Obama's job approval rating has fallen to 46 percent, according to a new CBS News poll.
That rating is Mr. Obama's lowest yet in CBS News polling, and the poll marks the first time his approval rating has fallen
below the 50 percent mark. Forty-one percent now say they disapprove of Mr. Obama's performance as president.
In last month's CBS News poll, 50 percent of Americans approved of how the president was handling his job, while thirty-
nine percent disapproved.
Analysis: The Irony Behind Obama's Poll Numbers
Mr. Obama still receives strong support from Democrats (eight in ten approve of his performance), but his approval rating
among Republicans is only 13 percent. More importantly, Mr. Obama's approval rating among independents has declined
10 points in recent months — and it now stands at just 42 percent.
Domestic issues — and not his response to terrorist threats - appear to be driving the president's approval rating
downward.
Just 41 percent now approve of his handling of the economy, which Americans say is the nation's most pressing issue.
Forty-seven percent disapprove. The president's marks on handling health care, with reforms still under debate in
Congress, are even lower — just 36 percent approve, while 54 percent disapprove. Both of these approval ratings are the
lowest of Mr. Obama's presidency.
Meanwhile, both parties in Congress receive even lower marks than the president on handling health care. Few
Americans think the reforms in Congress hit the right note on expanding coverage, lowering costs and regulating the
health insurance industry. (Read more on the health care poll results)
(CBS)
The president receives slightly higher ratings for his handling of the war in Afghanistan and the threat of terrorism than on
domestic issues. Forty-six percent approve of Mr. Obama's handling of Afghanistan, and 52 percent approve of how he is
handling the threat of terrorism.
While some Republicans have criticized the president and Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano's responses
to the attempted Christmas Day terror attack, most Americans don't share their opinion.
In the poll, 57 percent of Americans approve of the way the Obama administration has responded to the attempted attack,
and 29 percent disapprove. Views are highly partisan — 75 percent of Democrats approve, while just 41 percent of
Republicans and 55 percent of independents do.
More Findings from the Poll:
•Fear of another terrorist attack has increased since the attempted attack on a Northwest Airlines flight from Amsterdam
on Christmas Day. Now, 26 percent think another attack on the United States within the next few months is very likely, up
from 12 percent just before the latest incident. This is the highest percentage that has felt an attack was very likely since
March 2003, just after the U.S. invasion of Iraq.
•While most Americans (56 percent) have at least a fair amount of confidence that the government will protect its citizens
from future attacks, just 15 percent are very confident. In the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, more expressed confidence.
•Few Americans —just 19 percent - think U.S. intelligence agencies are doing all they could to monitor the actions of
suspected terrorists. Seventy-six think they could be doing more.
•Most Americans support conducting full body scans on travelers using a digital x-ray machine, a device some airports
are now using. Seventy-four percent agree these machines should be used because they provide a detailed check for
hidden weapons and explosives and reduce the need for physical searches. Just 20 percent think these machines should
not be used because they would produce an image of a passenger's naked body and are an invasion of privacy.
•Over half of Americans think the U.S. should continue to keep the Guantanamo Bay prison open. Thirty-two percent
think it ought to be closed and the prisoners there transferred somewhere else.
•The American public continues to volunteer the economy and jobs as the most important problem facing the country (44
percent), with health care a distant second (14 percent). In the wake of the attempted terror attack on Christmas Day, the
percentage that cites terrorism as the most pressing issue has risen to seven percent from zero percent early last month.
•The public's overall assessment of the condition of the national economy remains grim — 82 percent of Americans say
the economy is in bad shape. Looking ahead, 31 percent of Americans think the economy is getting better, while 19
percent think it is getting worse. Forty-nine percent now say the economy is staying the same."
4297,Yup. Will do
4298,"Record
See below"
4299,"<<Call Sheet for S on Mayor Bloomberg.docx>> Attached is the call sheet you requested for Mayor Bloomberg. Thnx for
doing this.
Kris"
4301,I talked to johnnie and relayed all info below to you. But so that u also have.
4302,"Thx kris
Will let you know when she calls"
4303,FYI.
4304,"Statement by the President on the Earthquake in Haiti
""My thoughts and prayers go out to those who have been affected by this earthquake. We are closely monitoring the
situation and we stand ready to assist the people of Haiti.""
Background information: The President was informed of the earthquake at 5:52pm. The President asked his staff to
make sure that embassy personnel are safe, and to begin preparations in the event that humanitarian assistance is
needed. The Department of State, USAID and the United States Southern Command have begun working to coordinate
an assessment and any such assistance.
###"
4305,fyl
4306,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, January 12, 2010 7:57 PM
Mills, Cheryl D; H
Sullivan, Jacob J; Crowley, Philip J
Re: From PauP
Americans? Or local staff?"
4307,For your approval.
4308,"FYI:
Jan 12, 2010
» Mobile Home » Top Stories
Inside the Reid eruption
By Mike Allen & Glenn Thrush I 1/12/10 @ 12:19 AM EST
Harry Reid isn't talkative. But the Senate majority leader chatted freely with the two disarmingly charming book authors
who came to his office at the Capitol shortly after the 2008 election.
They — and their tape recorder — were soaking in his reminiscences about the wild campaign that had turned a
backbencher in his caucus into president of the United States.
Reid wasn't on guard — perhaps because he'd been told by his staff that the meeting would be ""off the record,""
according to a person with knowledge of the exchange.
Although Reid is a master of the Senate's mysterious inside game, he's often botched the outside game because of what
one colleague calls a ""penchant for saying things without a filter.""
But Jim Manley, Reid's senior communications adviser, wasn't too worried as he and his boss sat down with John
Heilemann of New York Magazine and Mark Halperin of Time magazine — two veteran reporters who were working on
what their publisher had billed as ""a sweeping, novelistic, and ultimately definitive portrait"" of the 2008 race.
Like virtually every Washington political insider, Manley had a long and warm relationship with Halperin, the longtime
political director for ABC News who once set conventional wisdom in Washington with ""The Note.""
Maybe Reid and Manley — thinking back to their many candid exchanges over the years — simply assumed that
Halperin wouldn't burn him or his boss. Or maybe he expected that Halperin would check back with him on any quotes
he planned to use?
Whatever they were thinking, they were wrong.
Reid was talking about the reasons why, even though he had publicly professed neutrality in the vicious Democratic
primaries of 2008, he had secretly encouraged then-Illinois Sen. Barack Obama to challenge another member of his
caucus, then-New York Sen. Hillary Clinton. And amid all the talk of Obama's oratorical gifts, he let slip something else:
Obama could win the White House because he was a ""light-skinned"" African-American ""with no Negro dialect, unless he
wanted to have one.""
The authors write in ""Game Change,"" published this weekend, that Reid had made the remark ""privately."" They did not
say he had said it to them.
As a chagrined Reid telephoned political allies in the Senate and civil rights community to shore up his support this
weekend, he made it clear that he felt burned by the authors.
In the book's""Authors' Note,"" they wrote: ""All of our interviews — from those with junior staffers to those with the
candidates themselves — were conducted on a 'deep background' basis, which means we agreed not to identify the
subjects as sources in any way. We believed this was essential to eliciting the level of candor on which a book of this sort
depends.""
Heilemann said on MSNBC's ""Morning Joe"": ""We had a very clear agreement with all those sources that our interviews
would be on deep background.... Our ground rules are ... that we won't identify any of our sources as the sources of the
material. But we said to them all very clearly that if they put themselves in scenes of the book, if they were uttering
dialogue to people in the book in part of a scene, that we would identify them as the utterer of those words.""
Halperin added: ""There's no one we talked to for the book who we burned in any way, or violated any agreement with.""
Manley, a Capitol Hill veteran who also had worked for the late Sen. Ted Kennedy, had been responsible for monitoring
the interview and dealing with issues arising from it.
But he didn't tell anyone else in Reid's inner circle about the inflammatory remarks their boss had made; because of his
good relationship with the authors, he assumed that the quotes would never be made public — at least not without his
knowing about it first.
Manley declined comment on this story-- and wouldn't confirm if the interview took place.
On Friday at 10 p.m. — half a year after the interview — The Atlantic's Marc Ambinder e-mailed Reid's staff with
questions about a ""light-skinned"" candidate without a ""Negro dialect.""
In the second-guessing that followed, Capitol Hill veterans said there was no way that such inflammatory words from a
Senate majority leader would remain off the record, even if that had been the arrangement.
But because Manley had not sounded an internal alarm, he and the rest of the damage-control squad were caught flat-
footed by Ambinder's e-mail, several people close to the situation told POLITICO.
""They could have had weeks to prepare for this or to try to convince Halperin not to run it,"" said a Democrat who
participated in some of the damage control.
Now the staff had been blindsided with a revelation that, if mishandled, could be politically fatal. Manley and other
aides worked until 2 a.m. Saturday to draft Reid's carefully written apology, which emphasized his record on African-
American issues.
""I deeply regret using such a poor choice of words,"" the 90-word statement began.
Later on Saturday, Manley helped lead a counteroffensive, calling White House press secretary Robert Gibbs, a friend
from his days as communications director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, to set up an apology call
between Reid, at home in Searchlight, Nev., and Obama back in Washington.
In a stunning ""Statement by the President"" e-mailed to reporters at 3:55 p.m. Saturday, Obama said: ""Harry Reid called
me today and apologized for an unfortunate comment reported today.... As far as I'm concerned, the book is closed.""
Relieved to have the president's solid backing, Reid's aides decided that their toughest challenge would be to prevent
any prominent African-American Democrats from attacking Reid too harshly — or calling for his resignation.
Reid's team correctly anticipated that Republicans would demand his head. Keeping that criticism from becoming a
bipartisan drumbeat was the key. The team calculated that as long as the attacks looked like partisan shouting, Reid
would benefit.
Aides say their boss quickly understood the danger and spent much of Saturday working a call list of about 30 prominent
African-Americans across the country. On the calls, he apologized for his words and argued that the book's main
takeaway should be that he had quietly supported Obama over Clinton, long before those made his feelings public.
Among those he called were the Rev. Al Sharpton; longtime civil rights leader Julian Bond; Rep. Barbara Lee (D-Calif.),
chairwoman of the Congressional Black Caucus; political consultant and talk-show fixture Donna Brazile; House Majority
Whip Jim Clyburn (D-S.C.); Wade Henderson, CEO of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights; and Hilary Shelton,
director of the NAACP's Washington office.
The extent of the damage to his already shaky reelection chances in Nevada won't be known until November. But by
Monday, Reid believed the Washington storm was passing. From his home in New York, Sen. Chuck Schumer telephoned
Reid in Nevada and offered to organize a letter of support from all the Democratic senators.
Reid decided that was unnecessary. He had confidently concluded that for now, at least, he had won the inside game."
4309,Am cits
4310,Here you go:
4311,Roger.
4312,"Latest below
We did a series of interagency calls from 7pm - 11pm.
Raj going out on am shows - potus will announce him as point for coordinating our disaster assistance.
We will start search and rescues teams at sunlight (w/no heavy equipment getting folks out will be hard).
We have requests for hel from Irish, canadian tai
David lindewall is doing good job.
See b/1.
Cdm"
4313,Fyi
4314,"Importance:
FYI
High"
4315,FYI
4316,"FYI
We have not announced the amount raised."
4317,FYI
4320,"Assume the following two pieces from Dawn in Karachi reached you through other channels, but just to be sure.
The first is exactly the bad story I was worried about.
The second is the Administration's attempt to shoot it down.
Bottom line (another four-letter word): ""Whew!""
FIRST STORY
Talks under way for N-deal with US: Haqqani
By Zulciernain Tahir
Monday, 15 Feb, 2010 I 06:02 AM PST I
LAHORE: Pakistan's Ambassador to US Husain Haqqani has said the government has started negotiating with the United
States for an agreement on nuclear technology.
""The US is not sceptical about our nuclear programme. Talks between Pakistan and the US for cooperation on atomic
programmes are under way and we want the US to have an agreement with us like the one it had with India on civil
nuclear technology,"" Mr Haqqani said at a reception hosted by Punjab Governor Salmaan Taseer on Sunday.
He said Pakistan would get 16 latest F-16 aircraft in June. He said although the expectations of Pakistan and the US with
each other usually did not fulfil, both were indispensable for each other.
""We have to largely depend upon the US for our defence related matters.
""India is our main concern as it is buying weapons worth $100 billion from five countries, including China, and to balance
it our relations with the US are very significant,"" he said and added that India had 5,500 tanks and there was a question
against whom they would be used. ""We cannot be assured by statements that India will not wage a war against us.""
Giving a reason as to why Pakistan had to look towards the US for enhancing its military capacity and capability, Mr
Haqqani said the European countries did not offer soft terms for buying weapons. ""Ties with the US are important for a
secure, stable and prosperous Pakistan.""
Mr Haqqani said Pakistan had also made it clear on the US that it should ensure a strengthened and Islamabad-friendly
regime in Kabul before leaving.
He said Pakistan had sought drone technology from America. ""On one hand our innocent people are losing their lives
while on the other Taliban leaders like Baitullah Mehsud get killed in such attacks,"" he said.
Mr Haqqani said the US wanted to strengthen democracy in Pakistan and aid under the Kerry-Lugar Bill had started
coming from January.
In reply to a question, he said Pakistan's embassy in the US was working on diplomatic and legal aspects in Dr Aafia
Siddiqui case and was making efforts for securing her release or transfer of her case to a Pakistani court.
SECOND STORY
No nuclear deal with Pakistan, says US
By Anwar lqbal
Monday, 01 Mar, 2010 I 07:15 AM PST I
WASHINGTON: The Obama administration has told Pakistan it would not get an atomic power plant or a civilian nuclear
deal from the United States.
A senior US official, while briefing Indian journalists in Washington, said the United States was working closely with
Pakistan to help meet its growing energy needs.
""But nuclear power is not currently part of our discussions,"" and the United States had conveyed its decision to Pakistan,
the official said.
He said the administration had also told Pakistan that ""there is no way they can get a civilian nuclear deal similar to the
one the Obama administration has signed with India"".
The lndo-US civilian nuclear deal, the official said, was ""specific to India only and there is no thinking going on in the
administration to create a template for it."""
4321,"Cc:
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Monday, March 1, 2010 12:45 PM
B6
H"
4322,CDM & Raj live on CNN (ch 14)
4324,B6
4325,We are all watching thx.
4327,"Thanks for the note. Would love to follow up on Pakistan and also have another idea I'd like to talk to you about. By copy
of this email I am asking Jenn Golden from my office to find a time to meet. Hope to see you soon.
JM"
4328,"Your fans are here by the hundreds and eagerly awaiting your speech on the 12th!
As you know the US has been a strong supporter of a new women's agency at the UN that would provide for an Under
Secretary General for women's issues, better coordination and effectiveness and-- consolidation of a group of smaller
entities. In bilats today, I learned that some G77 countries are wondering what's in it for them. They're not developing
countries and they're not the UK or US. Brazil may be second guessing the creation of the new agency yet this is an
agency that will benefit women everywhere. I don't know if you'll have an opportunity to say to Brazil's leader that we
hope the UN women's agency will continue to have their support. In fact Tom Shannon told me that they're really
interested in women's issues and wanted to sign a MOU with us. Sometimes there's a disconnect between NY perm reps
and their capitals
2nd, I don't know if you're still going to Chile. If you talk to Bachelet about her future, you can tell that so many govt reps
at the UN would like to see her head up the new women's agency. It's not clear if she's even interested.
Thx"
4329,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, January 13, 2010 4:10 PM
FW: Good Job!
fyi"
4332,fyi
4336,Fyi
4337,"Smart money seems to be on the thing coming out OK tomorrow -- a heavy prologue on all the reasons they don't
believe the process will lead anywhere,
1.4(D)
B1'
Declassify on: 08/26/2040"
4338,Tx
4339,"Talked to Jack, who is meeting with Tom, Michele and Floss C tomorrow at 730 on AfPak and will raise the Chile issue."
4340,"FYI - see Michele message
Forwarded message"
4341,FYI
4342,FYI
4343,Fyi - from your ambassador in papua new guinea.
4347,"RELEASE IN PART
B6"
4349,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, January 14, 2010 6:37 AM
Public number
You can give out a number for the public to call for questions or information on Haiti.
1-888-407-4747
For foreign leaders, the Ops number of is best."
4350,Yep -- will follow up.
4351,FYI — I will limit Haiti emails to major fyi information for you.
4353,"Possibility of Senate Run, Nurtured and Abandoned By MICHAEL BARBARO March 03, 2010 New York Times
A few weeks ago, Harold E. Ford Jr. had a telephone conversation with his friend Doug Band, the powerful counselor to
former President Bill Clinton.
Mr. Ford, the former Tennessee congressman who now works on Wall Street, wanted to discuss a potential challenge to
Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand in New York's Democratic primary, a possibility he had flirted with for weeks.
But Mr. Band was not encouraging. He told Mr. Ford that with Democrats reeling from political setbacks across the
country, it would be bad for the party and his career if he entered the race. ""It's not the right thing to do,"" he said,
according to a person with direct knowledge of the conversation.
A Ford spokesman confirmed the call but denied that Mr. Ford had been discouraged from running or that he had been
told that doing so would hurt the party. The spokesman said Mr. Band told him the White House had pressured Mr.
Clinton into supporting Ms. Gillibrand.
Mr. Ford's decision not to run for the Senate, which he disclosed on Tuesday, came after he reached out to dozens of
donors, advocates and political leaders. In private conversations, the same worries emerged: that a race against Ms.
Gillibrand would be a brutal fight, dominated by endless debates about when he began paying taxes as a New York
resident and the sincerity of his support for gay marriage and abortion rights.
A campaign that he had hoped would focus on tax cuts and job growth would instead, he feared, become mired in
discussions of ""who got there first, and who meant it the most,"" on social issues, he told an associate. That might allow a
Republican opponent to swoop in and take the seat from the bloodied Democratic nominee.
What seemed to weigh on him, interviews with dozens of people who have met and spoken to his advisers revealed,
was not his status as a carpetbagger who had moved to New York from Tennessee, but rather the reality that there were
few easy constituencies for him to grab on to, outside of Wall Street, where he has worked since moving here in 2006.
Many spoke on the condition of anonymity because they did not want to be seen as disclosing private conversations.
As he hopscotched from city to city, charming crowds with bits of his Southern biography, signs of trouble for Mr. Ford
emerged. His voting record in Congress put him on the right fringes of state Democrats, and his $2 million-a-year job at
Merrill Lynch made it hard to run as a Scott Brown-style populist.
What seemed like an improbable, even impossible campaign had its roots in conversations, many dating back a year,
among Mr. Ford, 39, and a coterie of powerful friends from New York City, Washington and Los Angeles.
Over dinner last July at the Post House, a clubby steakhouse on the Upper East Side, Richard Plepler, a co-president of
HBO, urged Mr. Ford to restart his political career in New York. ""I think you should give this serious thought,"" he said, of
the Senate race. Mr. Ford replied that he would.
After the dinner, Mr. Plepler sent an e-mail message to Douglas E. Schoen, a top Democratic pollster, to bounce the idea
off him. Mr. Schoen was intrigued, and as he studied public polls, became convinced that Mr. Ford's best shot at
reaching the Senate was to wage a campaign against Ms. Gillibrand.
Over the next few months, Mr. Ford sounded out many of New York's wealthiest and most politically connected
executives, frequently over breakfast at the Regency Hotel on Park Avenue: Robert Wolf, the head of the United States
investment banking division at UBS; Ronald Perelman, the billionaire chairman of Revlon; and Steven Rattner, the
founder of Quadrangle, the private equity firm, all of whom are big Democratic donors.
Mr. Rattner told Mr. Ford, who is also a political analyst on NBC, that money would not be a problem. ""You can raise the
money,"" he told him in December.
Yet several big-name donors warned him that Ms. Gillibrand, a relentless campaigner, had beaten him to the punch.
""She has already locked a lot of Wall Street up"" was the message that Marc Lasry, a billionaire hedge fund manager,
conveyed to Mr. Ford in a telephone conversation.
As Mr. Ford traveled outside New York City, especially upstate, he found political support for Ms. Gillibrand to be
shallow, and the hunger for change palpable. The mayor of Syracuse, Stephanie Miner, told him that residents there
were ""scared and desperate"" about the economy, and she told Mr. Ford that Ms. Gillibrand was a rare presence in her
city.
But Ms. Gillibrand's strategy of portraying Mr. Ford as a showboating out-of-towner was starting to stick. In late January,
the head of the Brooklyn Democratic Party, Assemblyman Vito J. Lopez, held a luncheon for Mr. Ford, and invited local
lawmakers. During a two-hour question-and-answer session, Marty Markowitz, the borough president, pointed to
several up-and-coming state senators around the room and observed that all of them had greater experience in New
York politics than Mr. Ford.
""With all due respect,"" he asked Mr. Ford, ""why do you think you have what it takes to be New York's senator?""
Even lawmakers who seemed open to a Ford candidacy warned him that peeling away support from Ms. Gillibrand
would be harder than it seemed.
Ruben Diaz Jr., the Bronx borough president, told Mr. Ford between bites of an omelet at a diner near his office, ""It's
difficult to make a strong case against her here."" Ms. Gillibrand, he explained, had just secured $4 million worth of
federal stimulus money to train his constituents for green jobs. Mr. Ford knew that some liberals would attack his
relatively conservative voting record but, those he spoke with said, he was taken aback by the depth of the anger he
encountered from advocates for abortion rights and gay marriage.
After reporters found examples of Mr. Ford calling himself pro-life during his time in Congress, Mr. Ford vehemently
pushed back, saying he had always supported a woman's right to choose. He assumed that would put the matter to rest.
It did not. ""He was dumbfounded that it kept tripping him up,"" a friend said.
One of Mr. Ford's top advisers, Bradley Tusk, the campaign manager for Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's 2009 re-election,
arranged a meeting for Mr. Ford with a close Bloomberg ally, Kelli Conlin, the head of Naral-Pro Choice of New York. Mr.
Ford expected a polite conversation that would help neutralize a foe. Ms. Conlin, however, started the meeting by
quizzing Mr. Ford on his voting record and public statements.
Did he realize, she asked, that he had backed legislation that would outlaw late-term abortions even when a woman's
health is in danger?
Far from conciliatory, Mr. Ford wanted to know why Naral allowed Ms. Gillibrand to vote for a health care bill that cut
off financing for abortions. ""You gave her a pass,"" he said. Before leaving, Mr. Ford told Ms. Conlin that if he chose to
run he hoped to return to ask for the group's support. Ms. Conlin responded: ""We can never support you if you take
these positions."" Mr. Ford ""looked shocked,"" a person in the room said.
His meeting with gay rights advocates on Feb. 24 was rockier still. When he walked into the headquarters of the
Stonewall Democrats in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan, he was greeted by signs that read ""Liar!"" and ""Go
home snake oil Harry,"" a reference to his recent support for gay marriage after having twice voted to outlaw it in
Congress.
A few days later, the results of a poll that Mr. Ford had paid for out of his own pocket began to trickle in, giving his
advisers pause. His negative ratings had increased slightly. A liberal primary electorate seemed wary about portions of
his record. Ms. Gillibrand remained vulnerable, the data showed, but Mr. Ford's chance seemed to be 50-50. ""It was not
a slam dunk, at all,"" said a person who spoke with him and was briefed on the data.
Mr. Tusk had told associates that to win, Mr. Ford needed 80 percent of the state's black vote, a tall order, but not
inconceivable for an African-American in a Democratic primary. But by the end of the week, Gov. David A. Paterson and
Representative Charles B. Rangel had become embroiled in ethics scandals. New York's black political elite was in
seeming disarray, just when he needed them to be organized and unified.
By Sunday, he had made up his mind not to run. He told his wife, Emily, and his father, former Representative Harold
Ford Sr. He began to call friends the next evening, leaving many of them brief messages.
""I'm not going to run this time,"" he said in one message. ""Thank you for your support."""
4356,"I am currently out of the office on official travel and will be checking e-mail periodically. If you need immediate
assistance, please call 202-647-9572."
4357,"I understand from Joe that you are reviewing the key material for the human rights reports. You might talk to Mike
Fuchs, who I asked to go thru the key reports with a fine-toothed comb."
4358,Thanks. Got it. Hope they will think carefully on VP. Will follow up on other items.
4359,"Thanks, glad I can help. Looking forward to going back. Leaving Sunday, stopping in Paris to do some civil nuclear
meetings then into Geneva to meet with Antonev on Tuesday.
Looking forward to talking when convenient on secure line this weekend."
4360,Armenian Genocide Resolution vote in committee: 23 yes/22 no. Gavel just went down.
4361,"Yes, Ma'am, China ratified in 1996."
4362,rshah
4363,"III add him to your grid
C."
4367,"INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION
• (U) Colombian President Uribe intends to travel to Haiti January 17, according to press. His government
will also send a naval hospital ship. (Rendon News Alerts)"
4368,"Salvation Army)on NPR saying he is upset because they are running out of supplies and
he keeps being told they are in the air.
Yes
While we have control of airport — the Haitians are dictating the priority of landing of planes and the document did not
get signed today b/c at meeting the issue did not get resolved (or medical supply issue).
On with Ken now — getting ready to try calling Preval with Ken"
4369,FYI
4370,"FYI —
POLITICO
Boehner chief of staff dies at 46
By: Patrick O'Connor
January 10, 2010 01:40 PM EST
Paula Nowakowski, the longtime chief of staff to House Republican Leader John Boehner,
died unexpectedly Saturday night, according to the leader's office. She was 46.
""It is with profound sadness and shock that I announce the passing of Paula Nowakowski,
my longtime chief of staff, trusted aide and friend, who died suddenly last night,"" Boehner
said in a statement early Sunday afternoon. ""Words cannot adequately express the sorrow
and disbelief I and every member of our team are grappling with today in the wake of this
stunning news.""
A Boehner aide said the cause was an apparent heart attack.
President Barack Obama and Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) were among those who
called Boehner Sunday to offer their condolences on Nowakoski's death.
""The entire Capitol Hill community is shocked and saddened by the sudden passing of
Paula Nowakowski,"" Pelosi said in a statement. ""As Chief of Staff to Republican Leader
John Boehner, Paula earned the respect not only of her Leadership and Conference, but
all House Members on both sides of the aisle. She served Leader Boehner both in his
current position as well as previously at the Committee on Education and the Workforce
with great distinction.
""Paula was a thorough professional who loved the House and worked in a constructive
and bipartisan fashion to implement policies to help the Congress function efficiently. On
behalf of the entire House, I express our deep sadness to Paula's family, friends and our
colleague, Leader John Boehner.""
""Paula had some of the finest qualities a public servant can have: she was committed to
advancing the cause of freedom, she cared deeply about the people she served, and she
was a patriot,"" said Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-KY.).
""On behalf of her senate colleagues, I pass on my condolences to her family, Leader
Boehner and his staff, and the whole House family for this tragic loss of our friend.""
It would be hard to overstate Nowakowski's role in Boehner's tight-knit office. She has
worked for the Ohio Republican almost continuously since 1995, when she joined his staff
as communications director for the Republican Conference.
In the years since, she has worked as staff director for the Education and Labor
Committee and served as his chief of staff since he returned to the leadership in early
2006. She briefly left Boehner's side in 1998 after he lost the conference post following a
tough election for Republicans but rejoined him in 2001 when he assumed the
chairmanship of the Education and Labor Committee.
Along the way, she counseled Boehner on just about every decision he made and often
served as an enforcer of sorts for the collegial Republican leader. It would be hard to find
any chief of staff on Capitol Hill who maintained a closer relationship with her boss than
the one she shared with Boehner.
Aides said Sunday that Boehner's office and extended network of former colleagues,
known to many as ""Boehner-land,"" were collectively shocked by the news.
""We will remember Paula as she would want to be remembered — as a tireless worker,
faithful friend, rabid Detroit sports fan, whip-smart strategist, warrior for freedom and
devoted Catholic who counted President Ronald Reagan and Pope John Paul II among
her greatest heroes. She will never be replaced or forgotten,"" Boehner said. ""I ask for your
prayers for Paula's family.""
©2009Capitol News Company, LLC
FD HIDDEN DIV
Tmt Washington ost
NEWS! POLITICS I OPINIONS! BUSINESS I LOCAL I SPORTS I ARTS & LIVING I GOING OUT GUIDE I JOBS I CARS I REAL ESTATE
'SHOPPING
Paula Nowakowski, Rep. Boehner's chief of staff, dies at 46
By Martin Weil
Washington Post Staff Writer
Monday, January 11, 2010; B04
Paula Nowakowski, 46, chief of staff for House Minority Leader John A. Boehner, was found dead Jan. 10 at
her home in Alexandria.
No official cause of death was available. Antonia Ferrier, a spokeswoman for Boehner (R-Ohio), said it
appeared that Ms. Nowakowski died of a heart attack.
A longtime Hill aide, and Boehner's staff chief since 2006, Ms. Nowakowski was named by the Capitol Hill
publication Roll Call to its 2009 list of the ""Fabulous Fifty"" staff members. The accolade recognized her savvy,
her clout and her access to the top people in Congress.
Ms. Nowakowski, an avowed conservative, was highly regarded by leaders of both parties.
She was praised by Boehner and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.).
""It is with profound sadness and shock that I announce the passing of Paula Nowakowski, my longtime chief of
staff, trusted aide, and friend, who died suddenly,"" Boehner said in a statement.
""Words cannot adequately express the sorrow and disbelief I and every member of our team are grappling with
today in the wake of this stunning news,"" Boehner said.
Pelosi called Ms. Nowakowski a ""thorough professional who loved the House and worked in a constructive and
bipartisan fashion to implement policies to help the Congress function efficiently.""
According to WhoRunsGov. corn, a Washington Post Co. Web site, Ms. Nowakowski grew up in St. Clair
Shores, Mich., and studied English at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.
She told Politico of being made more conservative by the campus ""rise of the loony left,"" citing ""wacky, wacky
stuff,"" which shaped her politics.
According to a reference book on congressional aides, she worked for the Republican National Committee in
the late 1980s and early 1990s, then joined the staff of the House Republican Conference. After two years as a
public affairs vice president of the American Insurance Association, she worked from 2001 to 2006 as staff
director of the House Committee on Education & the Workforce. A Boehner aide said she worked for him at
both the Republican Conference and the Education Committee.
Pelosi's staff chief, John Lawrence, who was Ms. Nowakowski's Democratic counterpart on the education
committee, said they transcended political differences to ""work in a very collegial way to strengthen the House
itself."" He called her ""a great professional.""
After the GOP lost its House majority in 2006 , Ms. Nowakowski said she experienced ""the seven stages of
grief,"" according to the Almanac of the Unelected 2008, a reference on Hill staffers.
""You don't want to be a compliant minority,"" she said of the party's new status, ""but you have to adjust your
expectations.""
In his statement, Boehner called Ms. Nowakowski ""a tireless worker, faithful friend and rabid Detroit sports
fan.
Survivors include her longtime companion, Michael Smith, her mother, a brother and a sister.
C 2010 The Washington Post Company"
4371,"REPUBLIC, AND ON THEIR WAY HOME
Importance:
Love th cg"
4372,"STATEMENT OF SECRETARY CLINTON
The Passing of Victoria DeLong
This morning I spoke with the family of Victoria DeLong, the Cultural Affairs Officer at our Embassy in Port-Au-Prince
who lost her life in the earthquake. I expressed my sincerest condolences on behalf of the men and women of the State
Department and the American people. This is one tragedy among so many. The United Nations has suffered grevious
losses. And the Hatian people have endured unimaginable heartbreak. For the State Department, we have lost one of
our own. Victoria was a veteran Foreign Service Officer who worked tirelessly to build bridges of understanding and
respect between the people of the United State and the people of Haiti. She served her country with distinction and
honor, and she will be sorely missed. Victoria's friends and colleagues at the Embassy are working day and night to
support vital relief and recovery efforts, and our thoughts, our prayers, and our deepest thanks are with them as well.
Along with the military personnel, the search and rescue teams, and all the aid and relief workers now deploying, they
represent the unwavering commitment of the United States to stand with Haiti in its hour of need and in the hard days
and years to come. My heart is with the DeLong family today, and with all those in Haiti and around the world who have
lost loved ones and friends in this disaster.
###"
4373,Fyi
4375,"8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am OFFICE TIME
10:30 am Secretary's Office
10:30 am DROP-BY w/BRIAN ATWOOD
10:40 am Secretary's Office
10:50 am DEPART State Department *En mute White House
10:55 am ARRIVE White House
11:00 am NSC MEETING w/POTUS
12:00 pm Situation Room
12:05 pm DEPART White House *En route State Department
12:30 pm PHONE CALL w/PETER ROBINSON, FIRST MINISTER (T)
Secretary's Office
12:45 pm PHONE CALL w/MARTIN MCGUINNESS, DEPUTY FIRST
MINISTER (I) Secretaty's Office
1:00pm PHONE CALL w/ARLENE FOSTER, ACTING FIRST MINISTER (1)
Secretary's Office
1:15 pm PHONE CALL w/REG EMPEY (T)
Secretary's Office
3:30 pm PHONE CALL w/ HOUSE REPUBLICANS
Secretary's Office
Tbd OFFICE TIME
Secretary's Office
Time Tbd DEPART State Department *En route Private Residence
Time Tbd ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
4376,"Just called Huma's line for you and asked you to call him back when you are finished at the White House.
Lauren"
4377,"This is a good suggestion from Jillian Burns in S/P....to make sure that children (and wonen) don't become targets of
traffickers, as happened in Pakistan."
4378,FY/
4380,"POLITICO Breaking News:
Rep. Vic Snyder (D-Ark.) announced tonight that he will be retiring at the end of his term, citing the difficult political
environment that he would have faced to win an eighth term in the House."
4381,"Importance: High
FYI Below.
FYI — I spoke to Lady Catherine Ashton who called to 1) wish you well on this trip and express her gratefulness that you
are traveling; and 2) ask if you might be willing to call her Sunday morning to give her a read out of your trip b/c she has
a briefing in Brussels and having a first hand report from you will allow her to forestall a trip to Haiti in the next week.
cdm"
4382,"Just a quick note to tell you that we are moving forward on the Expo funding. KIT came in at $500k, McGraw Hill at
$200k, Intel at $250k more, Delos Living (a Mantz client) $250k, and CITI at a minimum of $2M brings us down to $3.7M.
The following are on deck and likely to come in soon - Boeing (more), Carlyle, Blackstone, Alcoa, and AECOM. EB and I
chatting with many others."
4383,I think she may do an earlier call
4384,B6
4386,"Will do. Think we are in good shape. Immelt, Indra and Huntsman making calls. Mark Penn and Terry very helpful."
4387,Not sure who they were but fine to do 1pm - I'll make sure it works.
4388,"We told roberta 1pm works
Will offer ashton 12 for ashton so you are not rushed Lona says Cathedral isn't until 6pm if u decide to go. She has done
nothing about it."
4389,"Shall we try for today while you are in air? I'll have Ops work it for us. If corns don't cooperate their Sunday is best me.
I'm on the road Saturday and it will be difficult to go secure.
Safe travels.
Ellen"
4390,"We are also bringing the following ngo representatives on the plane with us.
They have infrastructure on the ground so we are just giving them a ride there. Ngos are concern worldwide, catholic
relief services, food for the hungry and world vision."
4391,Take a look — a reminder of the trauma our workers have confronted.
4392,"We are setting you up to meet with UN tomorrow - it will be Mulet (he is ne Heda Anabi) and we also will have UN
General - Floriana Peixoto, and we'll bring Keen and Luck (or Callahan) to the meeting."
4395,"sbwhoeop
Friday, March 5, 2010 9:52 AM
H: More trouble for Tories and Cameron. He needs to support NI peace, not another
problem. Sid
March 5, 2010
New blow for Tories as lead slips in marginals
By Nigel Morris and Michael Savage
Poll shows crumbling support in target seats as David
Cameron is drawn into Ashcroft non-dom row
The Conservative lead is crumbling in the crucial marginal seats that David Cameron is relying on to deliver general
election victory for the party, a poll last night disclosed.
The result was a fresh setback for the Tory leader after a torrid day in which he was drawn deeper into the row over the
billionaire peer Lord Ashcroft, when it emerged that he had known for less than a month that Lord Ashcroft had
maintained his non-dom tax status for 10 years.
The chances of the party drawing a line under the controversy were also wrecked by the announcement that Lord
Ashcroft will be summoned to the Commons to explain why he negotiated a secret deal to enter the House of Lords
without paying tax in this country on his overseas fortune.
With Gordon Brown expected to announce the election date this month, senior Tories have put a brave face on their
sliding support in national opinion polls since the turn of the year.
They insisted they were performing much more strongly in marginal constituencies where the drive for votes has been
masterminded and substantially funded by Lord Ashcroft.
The YouGov poll for Channel 4 News found the Tory lead in 60 Labour-held marginals had shrunk from seven to just two
points over the past year.
The slide in Conservative support is further evidence Britain could be heading for a hung parliament after the election
expected on 6 May. The survey put the Tories on 39 per cent (down four points since last year) and Labour on 37 per cent
(up one). YouGov calculated that the results would leave the Tories the largest party after the election, but 11 seats short
of an overall Commons majority.
An investigation by The Independent last week found the Tories spent £6m over two years in the marginal battlegrounds,
in most cases far outspending Labour and the Liberal Democrats.
The party faces the daunting challenge of capturing 117 seats to achieve a majority of just one - a task described by a
shadow cabinet member as a ""mountain to climb"".
The Conservatives received some good news yesterday when an 18-month inquiry by the Electoral Commission
concluded that the £5.1m they received in donations from Bearwood Corporate Services, controlled by Lord Ashcroft,
were legal. The party would have faced having to pay the money back had the electoral watchdog reached the opposite
conclusion.
However, the commission added its regret that the Tories refused to agree to interviews and that Lord Ashcroft had
destroyed documents relating to the ownership of the company."
4398,Adding raj as well.
4400,"I will be traveling today without access to my email. If you need to reach me urgently please contact Nora Toiv.
Toivnf@state.gov o
Thank you!"
4401,B6
4402,"I am traveling overseas and only have sporadic access to my email. If you need immediate assistance, please call State
Department Operations at 202-647-1512 and ask for Nora Toiv who can assist you.
cdm"
4403,"Welcome back. I changed my plans and will be back in DC this morning. I have meetings between 9 and noon but will
be available any time in the afternoon today or tomorrow and can work around your schedule. After spending several
hours on the phone last night I wanted to come back and attend to some of the logistical coordination issues."
4404,"rshah
RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6"
4405,"RELEASE IN PART
B1,1.4(B),1.4(D),B6"
4406,"During the transition, Time.com did a top ten cabinet members list. Reich was #9.
See list below.
Harold L. Ickes
2.
Henry Wallace
3.
Henry Morgenthau Jr.
4.
George Marshall
5.
Robert F. Kennedy
6.
William Ruckelshaus
7.
Elizabeth Dole
8.
Richard Riley
9.
Robert Reich
10.
Robert Gates
Here is what they wrote about Reich:
Robert Reich
Secretary of Labor, 1993-1997
A former Rhodes Scholar, Reich served as the 22nd Labor Secretary under President Bill Clinton. Among his
accomplishments were helping to implement the Family and Medical Leave Act, raising the minimum wage and leading a
crackdown on sweatshops. He currently serves as an adviser to President-elect Barack Obama and is a professor at the
University of California, Berkeley."
4407,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, March 5, 2010 4:37 PM
FYI WJC"
4408,"Final[1] jjs.docx; Draft_S-McGuinness_Call_Sheet-FINAL[1] jjs.docx
You had signed off on making these Ireland calls with jake for tomorrow morning as well so we are reaching out."
4410,"March 15, 2010
Op-Ed Columnist
Taking On China
By PAUL KRUGMAN
Tensions are rising over Chinese economic policy, and rightly so: China's policy of keeping its currency, the renminbi,
undervalued has become a significant drag on global economic recovery. Something must be done.
To give you a sense of the problem: Widespread complaints that China was manipulating its currency — selling renminbi
and buying foreign currencies, so as to keep the renminbi weak and China's exports artificially competitive — began
around 2003. At that point China was adding about $10 billion a month to its reserves, and in 2003 it ran an overall
surplus on its current account — a broad measure of the trade balance — of $46 billion.
Today, China is adding more than $30 billion a month to its $2.4 trillion hoard of reserves. The International Monetary
Fund expects China to have a 2010 current surplus of more than $450 billion — 10 times the 2003 figure. This is the most
distortionary exchange rate policy any major nation has ever followed.
And it's a policy that seriously damages the rest of the world. Most of the world's large economies are stuck in a liquidity
trap — deeply depressed, but unable to generate a recovery by cutting interest rates because the relevant rates are
already near zero. China, by engineering an unwarranted trade surplus, is in effect imposing an anti-stimulus on these
economies, which they can't offset.
So how should we respond? First of all, the U.S. Treasury Department must stop fudging and obfuscating.
Twice a year, by law, Treasury must issue a report identifying nations that ""manipulate the rate of exchange between their
currency and the United States dollar for purposes of preventing effective balance of payments adjustments or gaining
unfair competitive advantage in international trade."" The law's intent is clear: the report should be a factual determination,
not a policy statement. In practice, however, Treasury has been both unwilling to take action on the renminbi and unwilling
to do what the law requires, namely explain to Congress why it isn't taking action. Instead, it has spent the past six or
seven years pretending not to see the obvious.
Will the next report, due April 15, continue this tradition? Stay tuned.
If Treasury does find Chinese currency manipulation, then what? Here, we have to get past a common misunderstanding:
the view that the Chinese have us over a barrel, because we don't dare provoke China into dumping its dollar assets.
What you have to ask is, What would happen if China tried to sell a large share of its U.S. assets? Would interest rates
soar? Short-term U.S. interest rates wouldn't change: they're being kept near zero by the Fed, which won't raise rates
until the unemployment rate comes down. Long-term rates might rise slightly, but they're mainly determined by market
expectations of future short-term rates. Also, the Fed could offset any interest-rate impact of a Chinese pullback by
expanding its own purchases of long-term bonds.
It's true that if China dumped its U.S. assets the value of the dollar would fall against other major currencies, such as the
euro. But that would be a good thing for the United States, since it would make our goods more competitive and reduce
our trade deficit. On the other hand, it would be a bad thing for China, which would suffer large losses on its dollar
holdings. In short, right now America has China over a barrel, not the other way around.
So we have no reason to fear China. But what should we do?
Some still argue that we must reason gently with China, not confront it. But we've been reasoning with China for years, as
its surplus ballooned, and gotten nowhere: on Sunday Wen Jiabao, the Chinese prime minister, declared — absurdly —
that his nation's currency is not undervalued. (The Peterson Institute for International Economics estimates that the
renminbi is undervalued by between 20 and 40 percent.) And Mr. Wen accused other nations of doing what China actually
does, seeking to weaken their currencies ""just for the purposes of increasing their own exports.""
But if sweet reason won't work, what's the alternative? In 1971 the United States dealt with a similar but much less severe
problem of foreign undervaluation by imposing a temporary 10 percent surcharge on imports, which was removed a few
months later after Germany, Japan and other nations raised the dollar value of their currencies. At this point, it's hard to
see China changing its policies unless faced with the threat of similar action — except that this time the surcharge would
have to be much larger, say 25 percent.
I don't propose this turn to policy hardball lightly. But Chinese currency policy is adding materially to the world's economic
problems at a time when those problems are already very severe. It's time to take a stand.
Home
• World
• U.S.
• N.Y. / Region
• Business
• Technology
• Science
• Health
• Sports
• Opinion
• Arts
• Style
• Travel
• Jobs
• Real Estate
• Automobiles
• Back to Top
Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
• Privacy Policy
• Terms of Service
• Search
• Corrections
• RSS
• First Look
• Help
• Contact Us
• Work for Us
• Site Map"
4411,"We are working with Jake on some very good ideas that Bruce Jentleson has put forward, but I want to plant one idea
for you to mull."
4412,See original email PA
4413,"For hrc and wjc
of Little Rock B6"
4414,"Ma'am — Jake tells me that you are tired of the Lamplighter story. I'm sorry, I didn't know. But the Belfast people have
come up with a FANTASTIC story -- apparently, as per your request, they have tracked down the two kids who won the
peace essay contest in the 90s, and they are doing great things -- one is a teacher, one is a police officer. They are now
reaching out to get permission for you to tell their stories tomorrow night; assuming they will grant it, I am writing up
their stories now and will fax a revised draft to you shortly.
Sorry for the Lamplighter redux; I'll let Lissa know it's off-limits for at least a few years."
4415,"Ok, he's definitely keeping a very open mind Seeing him at 10:30am to suggest a few little things as baby steps"
4416,"Trying - they are a bit mad on two proper grounds - will make other donors less likel to give and our congress less likely
to give"
4417,"Removing Megan. Lamplighter is teapot story with Joyce McCarran that you stripped from Stormont. Here is what I
wrote to Megan (nothing about it being ""off-limits""!):
""She cut the Lamplighter example from her Stormont speech because she thinks she's played it out. Not sure how she'll
feel about it in this speech."""
4418,Lamplighter is teapot story with Joyce McCarran
4419,Agree - did you reach FM cannon
4420,"Voda ebeling <
Tuesday, March 16, 2010 5:26 PM
H; abedinh@state.gov
Fw: The bride
Forwarded Message ----"
4426,On the Hill this afternoon went pretty well. Will give you the full run down tomorrow morning.
4427,"PIR <preines(
Wednesday, March 17, 2010 12:59 AM
Huma Abedin
Steinberg Project: First (Baby) Step
http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2010/03/when-a-schedule-is-more-than-a-schedule/37587/
When A Schedule Is More Than A Schedule
By Marc Am binder
The Atlantic.com
Mar 16 2010, 9:45 PM ET
Close observers of the State Department noticed something different this afternoon: on the daily schedule distributed
by the department includes, for the first time, information on Deputy Secretary of State Jim Steinberg's appointments.
Until recently, the daily release included Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's schedule only. No longer.
""Steinberg will meet Wednesday with Singaporean Deputy Prime Minister Teo Chee Hean.""
The inclusion of Steinberg suggests that the department is aware that it needs to do a better job of integrating
Steinberg's portfolio into its general communications strategy and show how the leadership of the department acts in
concert.
""Jim has always been an integral part of the Secretary's team, but we haven't always shown how crucial he is to State's
mission,"" said Philippe Reines, Clinton's communications consiglieri. ""This is a one simple way to fix that.""
The Beltway rumor mill often includes gossip that Steinberg isn't happy, or that he's not seen as an integral part of
President Obama's foreign policy team, or that his efforts aren't appreciated.
Reines, who rarely speaks on the record, responded to a question about whether Steinberg is indeed unhappy in this
way: ""I'm not a shrink, and I have to confess that we don't sit around in a circle often enough exploring our feelings. But
what is crystal clear to everyone is that Jim is smart, dedicated, and valued.""
Steinberg has a been a principal adviser on issues ranging from Iran -- he is the administration's team lead, cybersecurity
and China (he's been tasked with pressuring China into accepting tougher sanctions on Iran), but his work often goes
unnoticed.
On Friday, he is said to have given a tongue-lashing to the Israeli Ambassador to the U.S., Michael Oren, about that
country's actions during a visit by Vice President Biden.
When President Obama selected Gen. Jim Jones as National Security Adviser, he asked Clinton to make Steinberg her
deputy -- and she did. Since day one, prognosticators have been predicting friction between Steinberg and Clinton,
although none has publicly surfaced."
4428,"Busy day yesterday - highlights:
-haiti delivered its vision, fine but needs work and cost alignment (3 year cost exceeds 78 with total need put at 11B for
complete rebuild - neither are great numbers based on analysis so work cont)
- discussion and presentation of both dev authority and MDTF (which is open for contributions now and will be
administered by WB with support from IDB)
- bellerive or preval to announce wjc in context of release on dev authority - supposedly today but if preval wants to
announce from Haiti that won't occur until thurs and will drive us all wild so pushing for today
-EC says it will do essentially 100M that is new (rest is 200M being repurposed; 100M - of which 20M is only new - being
repurposed). Of their repurposed money, 40M euros will go to debt support by end of april)
- France will do 70M euros a year for 2 years (upping their traditional annual contrib by SOM euros from 20M euros);
french will do some budget supp
- seeing spain, canada, and pot today
-tentatively seeing cubans today to discuss hospital cooperation proposal they sent as result of craighulissa last trip
-lots of whispering re timing of usg human rts report and a few pointed ques re our motivation on timing given pre-conf
and cont on 31Mar; preval still very upset - will be calling him on thurs as a post conf cony and hear him out
- pressure for budget support on everyone; french pointed out US says it doesnt do budget supp but sends 500M each
year to palestian auth in direct budget support suggesting we will do it when politically expedient for us
- worry about the rains and cont need for shelter (been raining in PauP for last 3 days).
Cdm"
4429,"H: In case you haven't seen it, this is the fully articulated view of the Netanyahu government and Likud about ""the crisis.""
-ihe New Republic is a preferred cutlet for the highest level Likudineocon propaganda. ?Viichae! Oren, a channel for Israeli
Intel, was a frequent contributor in the past. On a lower level; so was Michael Ledeen when he was trafficking
disinformation. The New Republic was critical in undermining Carter when he pressed Begin Israeli intel used Ledeen
and TNR to put out the stories on Billy Carter. But TNR is only one key being hit in the Wurlitzer. Here's one small but
frank thing: Axelrod should not be a foreign policy spokesman on any issue or area. He has badly exacerbated this one.
Many people in the press feel he's out of his lane and resent being lectured by him on foreq..3n policy. Foreign Policy
magazine website has run a piece on this, reflecting widespread sentiment. (I've enclosed this article bellow the TNR one
below.) I'd make Steinberg tell Donilon they need to rein in Axelrod. Axelrod has enough to do fixing the domestic messes
he's made. Let it come from Steinberg. He's unhappy anyway. Sid
http://www.tnr.corniarticie/world/the-crisis?page=0,0
Ea
Published on The New Republic
Was Obama's confrontation with Israel premeditated'?
Yossi Klein Halevi
4. March 16, 2010 17:13 pm
JERUSALEM—Suddenly, my city feels again like a war zone..Since the suicide bombings ended in 2005, life in
Jerusalem has been for the most part relatively calm. The worst disruptions have been the traffic jams resulting from
construction of a light rail. jUst like in a normal city. But navy, again, there are clusters of helmeted border nOtiCe near the
gates of the Old City. black smoke from burning tires in the Arab village across from my porch, young men marching with
green Islamist flags toward my neighborhood, ambulances parked at strategic places ready for this city's ultimate
nightmare.
The return of menace to Jerusalem is not because a mid-level bureaucrat announced stage four of a seven-stage process
in the eventual construction oft,600 apartments in Ramat Shiomo. a Jewish neighborhood in northeast Jerusalem. Such
announcements and building projects have become so routine over the years that Paestinians have scarcely responded,
let alone violently. In negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis, the permanence of Ramat Shiomo, and other Jewish
neighborhoods in East Jerusalem, has been a given. Ramat Shlomo, located between the Jewish neighborhoods of
French Hill and Rarrot, will remain within the boundaries of Israeli Jerusalem accord ng to every peace plan. Unlike the
Snail Jewish enclaves inserted into Arab neighbochoocis, on which Israelis are strongly buliding in the established
Jewish neighborhoods of East Jerusalem defines the national consensus.
Why, then, the outbreak of violence now? Why Harness ""day of rage"" over Jerusalem and the Palestinian Authority's call
to gather on the Temple Mount to ""save"" the Dome of the Rock from non-existent plans to build the Third Temple? Why
the sudden outrage over rebuilding a synagogue, destroyed by the Jordanians in 1948, in the Old City's Jewish Quarter,
when dozens of synagogues and yeshivas have been built in the quarter without incident?
The answer lies not in Jerusalem but in Washington. By placing the issue of building in Jewish neighborhoods in East
Jerusalem at the center of the peace process, President Obama has inadvertently challenged the Palestinians to do no
less.
Astonishingly. Obama is repeating the key tactical mistake of his failed efforts to restart Middle East peace talks over the
last year. Though Oben-la's insistence on a settlement freeze to help restart negotiations was legitimate, he went a step
too far by including building in East Jerusalem. Every Israeli government over the last four decades has built in the Jewish
neighborhoods of East Jerusalem; no government, let alone one headed by the Likud, could possibly agree to a freeze
there. Obama made resumption of negotiations hostage to a demand that could not be met. The result was that
Palestinian leaders were forced to adjust their demands accordingly.
Obama is directly responsible for one of the most absurd turns in the history of Middle East negotiations. Though
Palestinian leaders negotiated with Israeli governments that built extensively in the West Bank, they now refused to sit
down with the first Israeli government to actually agree to a suspension of building. Obama's demand for a building freeze
in Jerusalem led to a freeze in negotiations.
Finally, after intensive efforts, the administration produced the pathetic achievement of ""proximity talks""—setting
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations back a generation, to the time when Palestinian leaders refused to sit at the same table
with Israelis.
That Obama could be guilty of such amateurishness was perhaps forgivable because he was, after ail, an amateur. But
he has now taken his failed policy and intensified it. By demanding that Israel stop building in Ramat Shlomo and
elsewhere in East Jerusalem—and placing that demand at the center of American-Israeli relations—he's ensured that the
Palestinians won't show up even to proximity talks. This is no longer amateurishness; it is pique disguised as policy.
Initially, when the announcement about building in Ramat Shlomo was made, Israelis shared Vice President Biden's
humiliation and were outraged at their government's incompetence. The widespread sense here was that Netanyahu
deserved the administration's condemnation, not because of what he did but because of what he didn't do: He failed to
convey to all parts of his government the need for caution during Biden's visit, symptomatic of his chaotic style of
governing generally.
But not even the opposition accused Netanyahu of a deliberate provocation. These are not the days of Yitzhak Shamir,
the former Israeli prime minister who used to greet a visit from Secretary of State James Baker with an announcement of
the creation of another West Bank settlement. Netanyahu has placed the need for strategic cooperation with the U.S. on
the Iranian threat ahead of the right-wing political agenda. That's why he included the Labor Party into his coalition, and
why he accepted a two-state solution—an historic achievement that set the Likud, however reluctantly, within the
mainstream consensus supporting Palestinian statehood. The last thing Netanyahu wanted was to embarrass Biden
during his goodwill visit and trigger a clash with Obama over an ultra-Orthodox neighborhood.
Nor is it likely that there was a deliberate provocation from the ultra-Orthodox Shas party, which runs the interior ministry
that oversees building procedures. Shas, which supports peace talks and territorial compromise, is not a nationalist party.
Its interest is providing housing for its constituents, like the future residents of Ramat Shlomo; provoking international
incidents is not its style.
Finally, the very ordinariness of the building procedure—the fact that construction in Jewish East Jerusalem is considered
by Israelis routine—is perhaps the best proof that there was no intentional ambush of Biden. Apparently no one in the
interior ministry could imagine that a long-term plan over Ramat Shiomo would sabotage a state visit.
In turning an incident into a crisis, Obama has convinced many Israelis that he was merely seeking, a pretext to pick a fight
with Israel. Netanyahu was inadvertently shabby; Obama, deliberately so.
Ac.t,cording to a banner headline in the newspaper Ma'ariv, senior Likud officials believe that Obama's goal is to topple the
Netanyahu government, by encouraging those in the Labor Party who want to quit the coalition.
The popular assumption is that Obama is seeking to prove his resolve as a leader by getting tough with Israel. Given his
ineffectiveness against Iran and his tendency to violate his own self-imposed deadlines for sanctions, the Israeli public is
not likely to be impressed. Indeed, Israelis' initial anger at Netanyahu has turned to anger against Obama. According to an
Israel Radio poll on March 16, 62 percent of Israelis blame the Obama administration for the crisis, while 20 percent
blame Netanyahu. (Another 17 percent blame Shas leader Eli Yishai.) •
In the last year, the administration has not once publicly condemned the Palestinians for lack of good faith—even though
the Palestinian Authority media has, for example, been waging a months-long campaign denying the Jews' historic roots
in Jerusalem. Just after Biden left Ramailah, Palestinian officials held a ceremony naming a square in the city after a
terrorist responsible for the massacre of 38 Israeli civilians. That too didn't merit an administration rebuke.
Obama's one-sided public pressure against Israel could intensify the atmosphere of ""open season"" against Israel
internationally. Indeed, the European Union has reaffirmed it is linking improved economic relations with Israel to the
resumption of the peace process—as if it's Israel rather than the Palestinians that has refused to come to the table.
If the administration's main tactical error in Middle East negotiating was emphasizing building in Jerusalem, its main
strategic error was assuming that a two-state solution was within easy reach. Shortly after Obama took office, Rehm
Emanuel vvas quoted in the Israeli press insisting that a Palestinian state would be created within Obama's first tent.
instead, a year later, we are in the era of suspended proximity talks. Now the administration is demanding that Israel
negotiate over final status issues in proximity talks as a way of convincing the Palestinians to agree to those talks--as if
Israelis would agree to discuss the future of Jerusalem when Palestinian leaders refuse to even sit with them.
To insist on the imminent possibility of a two-state solution requires amnesia. Biden's plea to Israelis to consider a
withdrawal to an approximation of the 1967 borders in exchange for peace ignored the fact that Israel made that offer
twice in the last decade: first, when Prime Minister Ehud Barak accepted the Clinton Proposals of December 2000, and
then more recently when Prime Minister Ehud Olmert renewed the offer to Mahrnoud Abbas. Abbas, says Olmert, never
replied.
The reason for Palestinian rejection of a two-state solution is because a deal would require Palestinians to confine the
return of the descendants of the 1948 refugees to Palestine rather than to Israel. That would prevent a two-state solution
from devolving into a bi-national, one-state solution. Israel's insistence on survival remains the obstacle to peace.
To achieve eventual peace, the international community needs to pressure Palestinian leaders to forgo their claim to Haifa
and Jaffa and confine their people's right of return to a future Palestinian state--just as the Jews will need to forgo their
claim to Hebron and Bethlehem and confine their people's right of return to the state of Israel. That is the only possible
deal: conceding my right of return to Greater Israel in exchange for your right of return to Greater Palestine. A majority of
Israelis—along with the political system—has accepted that principle. On the Palestinian side, the political system has
rejected it.
In the absence of Palestinian willingness to compromise on the right of return, negotiations should not focus on a two-
state solution but on more limited goals.
There have been positive signs of change on the Palestinian side in the last few years. The rise of Hamas has created
panic within Fatah, and the result is, for the first time, genuine security cooperation with Israel. Also, the emergence of
Salem Fayyad as Palestinian prime minister marks a shift from ideological to pragmatic leadership (though Fayyad still
lacks a power base). Finally, the West Bank economy is growing, thanks in part to Israel's removal of dozens of
roadblocks. The goal of negotiations at this point in the conflict should be to encourage those trends.
But by focusing on building in Jerusalem, Obama has undermined that possibility too. To the fictitious notion of a peace
process, Obama has now added the fiction of an intransigent Israel blocking the peace process.
The administration, according to a report in the Israeli ne\Aispaper Yedito Aharonot, is making an even more insidious
accusation against Israel. During his visit, wrote Yediot Aharanot, Bicien told Israeli leaders that their policies are
endangering American lives in Afghanistan and Iraq. The report has been denied in the White House. Whether or not the
remark was made, what is clear today in Jerusalem is that Obama's recklessness is endangering Israeli--and Palestinian--
lives. As I listen to police sirens outside my window, Obama's political Intifada against Netanyahu seems to be turning into
a third intifada over Jerusalem.
Yossi Klein Ha/evils a senior fellow of the She/em Center in Jerusalem, and a contributing editor of The New Republic.
WM David Axelrod please be quiet, pease?
Posted By 4 '■ (I? ""
nikrionday, March 15, 2010
Commentary's Jqr2-.)ifese,
,e]'pp.1 is reacting way out of proportion to par,. inclav morninitalk
That said, she's got a germ of a good point:
David Axelrod — a political operative who now seems at the center of foreign-policy formulation (more on
this later) — went on the Fox, ABC, and NBC Sunday talk shows to repeat how insulted the Obami were
over Israeli building in Jerusalem and what an atf;:atet this was to them....
[I]t might have something to do with the fact that Axelrod and the Chicago pols are running foreign policy.
It's attack, attack, attack -- just as they do any domestic critic.
Quibble away with Rubin's characterization of ""Chicago pols,"" but she does raise a decent question: why on God's green
earth is the Obama equivalent of Karl Rove talking about foreign policy in public?
Since the tri2 from:Hag, its clear that the Obama administration has ratcheted up the rhetoric taiLvate, irLpublic, in
press_leaks and throupo.r.:“.!;':.ib. E,
,
r,a! oN.-
1.n.rq31,5 to their Israeli counterparts. Given what transpired, it's entirely.ap.oropriate
that the Obama administration make its displeasure felt publicly.
Why Axelrod, however? Sure, the Sunday morning talk shows wanted to talk health care as well. And it's true that
Axelrod, thought of as pro-Israel, could send a tough signal. Still, couldn't the administration have sent Hillary Clinton to
one of the Sunday morning talk shows instead? Wouldn't she have been the more appropriate spokesman.
I've spent enought time inside the Beltway to be leery of the gossipy tidbits I collect when I'm down there. That said, there
was one persistent drumbeat I heard during my last sojourn -- that Axelrod and the politicai advisors were acting as
Obama's foreign policy gatekeepers.
Now, I am shocked, shocked, that cciiiticialv., :hirkinc aciout foreimi oa!icv :n manner. That said, there is a
balance to be struck between political and policy advisors. Even David Frum admitted that this baiaiv otout ofhihatc.i<
during the Bush administration. I'd like to see things return to to the pre-21st century equilibrium. It would be disturbing if
the new equilibrium is that someone like David Axelrod becomes the foreign policy czar."
4430,XO
4431,"Colleagues, The Operations Center would like to call your attention to the following report received from Embassy
Dakar. DCM Jay Smith, Embassy Dakar reports a possible forced change of leadership in Guinea-Bissau. Reports indicate
that:
• Prime Minister Gomes and Chief of Defense Zamora lnduta have been arrested; • Early indications are the
deputy chief of defense may be responsible for the arrests; • The former Navy Chief of Staff has been ""liberated""
from the UN compound where he had been a refugee; • The president reportedly remains in office and it is unclear
if he is aligned with those arrested or those seeking to take power; • There are no official Americans in country and
approximately 12 private resident Americn citizens; Post is checking on their safety."
4432,"I'm going to call today to get more info and only way to make this work is to do on front end of talinn so u get back for
engagement party. But do u have any immediate reaction to the suggestion?"
4433,"Nice work Jake and Nora.
cdm"
4434,"Time Magazine is including Nancy Pelosi in their 100 Issue, and as you know from writing for others and being written
about, they ask other notables to write the accompanying text. They are inviting you to write the text that accompanies
Pelosi's
We all think you should do, the timing allows you to write a bit about the importance of health care."
4435,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Thursday, April 1, 2010 3:37 PM
Mills, Cheryl D
Fw: THANKS to Team Pledge Data
See bottom of message re the firsts.
These were innovations we pushed (particularly use of web for real time display of pledges and what initially was
described by those who did not like my idea as pay to play (or in this instance as I argued - it was pay to have a priority
speaking slot as those who did not have a pledge would get to speak, just not until the end).
Nice addition to our innovation and tech storyline.
Cdm"
4436,"Purpose of Call: Foreign Minister Nkoana-Mashabane has asked to speak with you about the upcoming vote at the
World Bank on the Medupi Power Plant in South Africa."
4438,"Jim is very agitated by some maneuverings related to the NPR. I should bring you up to speed on it when you have a
moment."
4439,"There was a garble on the middle east meeting. It's not chiefly on Mitchell travel or related issues. It's chiefly on how to
deal with the nuclear issue in the context of the upcoming summit. Though with the players at the table..."
4440,"They know, but she is not on the invite list. I will work on that."
4441,More on tech component
4442,"He is willing to take your call anytime between 9am and 4pm. What time would u like to do? Points below
The Secretary's Call Sheet for
Algerian Prime Minister Ahmed Ouyahia (AH-med ooh-YA-hee-ah)"
4443,Assume you remember her
4444,"Gibbs and Pi will/have deployed these:
• Some of the comments made yesterday by President Karzai are troubling and a cause for real concern.
• Together with our international partners, the United States is making great sacrifices and investing substantial
resources to defeat al Qaeda and its extremist allies, and to create opportunities for the Afghan people. As
President Obama has said, we have vital security interests in the region, and we are committed to helping
Afghanistan become strong, stable and prosperous.
• We would reiterate the commitments that both Presidents made during their visit last weekend. We are
discussing this with President Karzai and his Administration and we are seeking clarification of his remarks."
4445,"Conference Summary - Rough.docx; Note to S on Karzai 1 Apr Press Conf to send.docx;
Tab A Karzai 1 April Press Conference Summary - Rough.docx
Importance: High
Attached are materials on Karzai that RCH has discussed with you."
4446,"If Karl sees him at 2 tomorrow, that's 5:30 am here. So if you called first thing our time tomorrow, you'd follow him."
4447,"— Declassify on: 04/02/2025
Readout of conversation with Omar Zalchilwal, Afghan Minister of Finance
April 2, 2010
Barnett R. Rubin
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Barnett R. Rubin
B6"
4448,"Cc: Abedin, Huma"
4449,I think it's only 815 there now.
4450,"See the piece below on defamation of religion. Not bad.
http: I /www.economist.com/world/international/displavstorv.cfm?story id=15833005
Religion and human rights
The limits of freedom and faith
Mar 31st 2010
From The Economist print edition
Opponents of a bid by Muslim states to ""protect religion"" claim a small success
How dare you call us blasphemers?
IT DOES not happen often: Christian lobbyists, the sort who favour prayer in American classrooms and
crucifixes in Italian ones, lining up on the same side as secularists who battle to curb religion's role in the
public square. But in both those camps there has been some quiet satisfaction after a recent vote at the
United Nations. Not over the outcome, but over the slim margin of defeat.
On March 25th the Human Rights Council (HRC), a Geneva-based UN agency which often exasperates its
Western members, voted by 20 votes to 17, with eight abstentions, for a text that lists the ""defamation of
religion"" as an infringement of liberty. Nothing amazing there: the Organisation of the Islamic Conference
(OIC), which groups 56 mainly Muslim states (plus Palestine), has been working to push resolutions of
that kind through the General Assembly and other UN bodies since 2005. But the margin was the smallest
ever, and opponents think there could be a good chance of defeating a ""defamation"" motion next time one
comes around.
The OIC's idea is to establish the principle that faiths need protection, just as individuals do. It denies any
sinister intention (see article). And to some ears, the OIC's effort sounds like harmless UN-speak, but
nothing more. (The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, a congressionally
mandated body, has noted a logical flaw: defamation means harming the reputation of a living person or
entity: that implies that one can't defame an idea or a religious founder who is no longer, at least
physically, alive on earth.)
But critics of the OIC campaign, who include atheists, Christians and indeed some Muslims, say the
""defamation"" idea is worse than hot air: far from protecting human rights, it emboldens countries that use
blasphemy laws to criminalise dissent. What encourages these critics is that more countries seem to be
coming around to their view. Mexico, Uruguay, Argentina, Zambia and South Korea voted against the
latest resolution. Brazil criticised the text but abstained.
Deeper still inside the UN's bureaucracy, another battle over religion rages—and the stakes could be even
higher. An ""ad hoc committee"" is mulling ways to amend or extend the UN convention on racial
discrimination. Certain states want language that would fuse the categories of race and faith; some want a
new convention, or a protocol to the existing one.
For secularists (in the broad sense of people, including believers, who oppose the idea of faith having
privileged access to power), all this is alarming. Non-binding resolutions against defamation are bad
enough; a UN treaty on race-plus-religion would have legal force, at least for its signatories, and give
heart to theocrats.
At the HRC's latest discussion of this effort in March, the Algerian who oversees the project was keen to
plough ahead. But countries like Switzerland, Japan, Mexico, Argentina and France retorted that it would
be better to enforce the existing UN norms than dream up new ones. Efforts to widen the racism accord
will resume, with a new chairman, late this year—but critics are relieved to have stalled it. Still, would-be
theocrats may now focus harder on adding to the racism charter, because they face a real risk of being
defeated over defamation, in the view of Roy Brown, Geneva spokesman for the International Humanist
and Ethical Union.
Meanwhile a Christian-inspired NGO, the European Centre for Law and Justice, has been denouncing the
abuse of blasphemy laws in many OIC member states. How fair is their point? It is an easy case to make,
for example, over Pakistan.
Some 41 complaints of blasphemy were registered by police in Pakistan last year, says that country's
independent Human Rights Commission. In theory, blasphemy is punishable by death—a penalty that has
been handed down but never carried out. Worst-hit by the law are minorities like Christians and Ahmadis,
a group whose claim to be Muslim is rejected by the Pakistani state. Although abuse of the law is less rife
now than in the 1980s, when an Islamist general tightened up the rules, the law is still invoked in disputes
(over property, say) that have nothing to do with faith.
""The most vulnerable people, that is religious minorities, continue to be charged with
blasphemy,"" said Ali Dayan Hasan, a researcher at Human Rights Watch, a campaign group.
""But are people convicted? No. Rarely. It is used as an instrument of political and social
coercion.""
When convictions occur, they lead to long jail terms; and pre-trial detention can last for years. Pakistan's
parliament is revising the constitution but it has left intact the religious bits, despite a vow by the ruling
party to review the blasphemy laws. (Indonesia too has stepped back from a move to liberalise its
blasphemy regime.)
On Pakistani streets, the law has dire effects. In January 2009, in a village in Punjab province, five
Ahmadis, a labourer and four children, were charged with blasphemy. They had supposedly written
""Prophet Muhammad"" on the wall of a mosque toilet. The children were behind bars for nearly six months
till the charge was quashed.
And last September a young Pakistani Christian was accused of throwing part of the Koran down a drain.
It seems that his real crime, however, was affection for a Muslim woman. A mob torched a church, and
many Christians had to flee. He was taken to jail, where he died a few days later. His family alleged
torture; the authorities claimed suicide. There was mayhem at the funeral and the country's Christians
(see picture) were appalled. In some places, it is not the ""defamation"" of faith that threatens rights but
measures that supposedly defend it."
4452,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Friday, April 2, 2010 12:38 PM
H
FW: Karzai points
These are the points in circulation now for comment. Understand Eikenberry is reaching out to speak with you. He has
this draft."
4453,"Cc:
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Friday, April 2, 2010 12:57 PM
Abedin, Huma"
4454,"I would simply reiterate the need for a statement *FAST* and say that the embassy can follow up. This will help both of
us."
4455,Here is what I'm proposing:
4456,"One thing I missed:
Currency deferral decision likely tonight."
4457,"Waiting at Nora's now with Jackie for Shaun and his wife Camilla, you're welcome to join us. If you're around Sunday joe
Wilson is coming by to show the cut of the film about him and valerie starring Sean Penn. just us
and Joe and the film. Everything you've done on NI has had a beneficial effect. All good. This is a happy St Pat's Sid Sent
via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
4458,"03-23-2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue Press Clips March 24, 2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue
Press Clips 03-25-2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue Press Clips 03-26-2010.doc; Strategic
Dialogue Press Clips 03-27-2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue Press Clips 03-28-2010.doc;
Strategic Dialogue Press Clips 03-29-2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue Press Clips
03-30-2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue Press Clips 03-31-2010.doc
FYI, generally positive coverage.
im"
4460,"Did some research on Saving Americas Treasures. Looks like it is funded thru interior approps. Feinstein is Senate chair
and Norm Dicks is house chair. Moran will likely take over for Dicks, as he moves to take over defense subcommittee.
Happy to weigh in with both staffs, but you are also seeing Senator Feinstein this week for dinner. We can prepare a
short paper for her staff."
4461,Got it.
4462,"Cc: Abedin, Huma
Happy to chat at your convenience"
4463,"Yes, we will. Thank you, Courtney"
4464,"I will be outo f the office through Monday, April 5th. I will be checking e-mail periodically. If you need immediate
assistance, please call 202-647-9572."
4465,"German FM Westerwelle 930am
Sir Reg Empey 1030 am
Peter Robinson 1230pm
Martin McGuinness after 1230. His staff says he wants to talk today.
Catherine Ashton potentially today.
Condi Rice pushed to next week"
4466,"Will do
Same to you!"
4467,Ok
4468,"Ok we may miss ashton which wouldn't be end of world. Her staff has been emailing saying she's anxious to talk but they
haven't locked a time. I did tell her staff we weren't going to push russians to cancel quartet dinner."
4469,No windows at all yet from her team.
4470,I will prepare for Tuesday. Happy Easter!
4471,"Madam Secretary,
In addition to moving back Sir Reg Empey's call to 10:30, Ops has confirmed your call with
UK First Minister Robinson at 12:30.
Regards,
Courtney"
4472,"Happy Easter!
AM
Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Sunday, April 4, 2010 10:07 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
On a day of easter peace ..."
4473,"PIR <preines
Saturday, March 6, 2010 10:50 AM
H
Huma Abedin
Reminder: WaPo Call re Bob Barnett
Gentle reminder about the Bob Barnett profile he emailed you about. Story is being written by David Montgomery of the
Washington Post, and is slated to run tomorrow - so we need to do this today, the earlier the better.
All you have to do is call into Ops when you're ready, they will connect you to the reporter (and add me in)
Here's the reporters description on the piece: ""...a large profile of Bob Barnett for the Style section. I know Barnett has
been a friend and counselor and campaign supporter over the years. I would like to ask Secretary Clinton her estimation
of what makes Barnett good at what he does, what he has meant to her in the various ways he has worked for her over
the years. And I would like to ask what she makes of how such a committed Democrat as Barnett is able to work so well
in his professional life for noted Republicans on book projects and other work. (A theme of the piece is how some say
Barnett harkens to a mythic time in Washington when players supposedly could more readily have relationships with
other side, even while sticking to principles in their political work)""
You have talked about Bob many times, but general points:
B5"
4475,Yep
4477,FYI
4478,I think we're fine on this.
4479,"sbwhoeop
Monday, April 5, 2010 6:30 PM
H: UK election being called. Sid
Gordon is going to call the election tomorrow for May 6. I'm going to go over for that week. Sid
Labour c.uIi win most seats at eneral
election, poll shows
Guardian/ICM poll reveals gap between two main parties at four points — the closest in an ICM poll for almost two years
• Julian Glover
• aardian.co.uk, Monday 5 April 2010 19.02 BST
• Article history
Lbr still has a fighting chance of winning the most seats in the general election, according to a Guardian/1CM poll
published today.
The findings suggest Tory hopes of a defining breakthrough have been overplayed, with the gap between the two main
parties now at just four points — the closest in an 1CM poll for almost two years.
Labour support has climbed four points to 33% since an ICM poll carried out for the Guardian last week. Conservative
backing has dropped one since then to 37% — Labour's best ICM rating since December 2008 and the Tories' worst since
February.
On a uniform national swing, these figures could leave Labour 30 seats short of an overall majority. Even if the Tories
perform better than average in marginal seats — as most people expect — David Cameron would struggle to establish a
secure parliamentary basis for power.
Either party could be left dependent on the fiber:a) Democrats, who are on 21% in the poll — down two from last week.
Despite that decline, the Lib Dems will be pleased by the strength of their position going into the election. The party has
been at or above 20% in seven of this year's 11 ICM polls.
Meanwhile support for other parties, which peaked last spring in the European elections, has fallen again to just 9%.
At the start of an election campaign likely to see more polling than ever before in British politics, today's figures will be
treated with caution unless confirmed by other surveys.
Some polls late last week suggested the Conservative lead had grown rather than shrunk, and research may have been
affected by the Easter holidays, when some voters would have been away from home. Yet the results suggest that
Labour's chances should not be written off, and events such as the leaders' debates could prove decisive in the coming
weeks.
Today's poll suggests 60% of people are planning to watch at least one debate, with 29% saying they plan to watch all
three. Only 39% of voters said they would not watch any of them.
The ICM survey also asked voters whether they might switch away from their first choice party and, if so;who they might
back instead.
Labour and Tory support is now equally solid. Overall, 71% of Labour supporters say they will definitely back Labour while
71% of Tories also say they will stick with their first choice party.
Lib Dems, however, are less loyal — only 52% are sure they will end up giving Nick Clegg their vote. That leaves just over
a quarter of each main party's supporters considering backing another party.
The proportion of Lib Dems and ConservatIves. saying they might vote Labour instead has doubled since ICM last asked
this question earlier in the year. The ICM figures suggest the maximum potential vote for Labour and the Conservatives —
all their definite supporters, plus all potential switchers — is running neck and neck at 42%. The Lib Dem maximum is 28%.
Realistically, Labour is unlikely to beat its 2005 share of 36% and even today's poll suggesting it has shed only three
points since then will surprise many. Nonetheless, there is all to play for as the contest begins now.
•ICM Research interviewed a random sample of 1,001 adults aged 18 and over by telephone on 1-3 April 2010.
Interviews were conducted across the country, and the results weighted to the profile of all adults. 1CM is a member of the
British Polling Council and abides by its rules."
4480,"Not for public acknowledgement but, as we have said, consistent engagement at the highest levels actually works.
Ibrahim is CEO of GEO and a major figure in Pakistani media circles."
4481,"Yes, the agreement with Lavrov? Working on details today.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State"
4482,"Will do.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Scretary of State"
4483,"Carlos:
McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Thursday, March 18, 2010 6:24 AM
Pascual, Carlos (Mexico City)
Williams, James H (Mexico City); Dickson, John S; Castillo, Raymond A; Mills, Cheryl D;
Sullivan, Jacob J; DiMartino, Kitty; Douglas, Walter T; Macmanus, Joseph E
Strategic Communications
First, let me say how shocked we all were by the news over the weekend. I know this is a very difficult time for everyone
at the Mission and our thoughts are with all of you.
I had a good conversation with Jim Williams about the strategic communications initiative and I wanted to bring you up
to speed on our thinking and where things stand with Keith.
Based on our discussions and the excellent paper that Jim prepared I think there are several critical areas that we need
to address:
• Work with our counterparts in the Mexican government to help them develop their capacity to handle the
communications aspects of the drug initiative more effectively
• Develop a process for ensuring the GOM and USG have clear, coordinated and consistent messaging on all
aspects of the initiative
• Increase public awareness in Mexico about ""Merida"" ; based on a report I got from INR last week there is very
little awareness or understanding of the program in Mexico and the contributions of USG
• Work with GOM to develop an on-going and effective communications strategy at all levels to provide people
across the country with information that is directly relevant to them and which they need to navigate their way
through this crisis. For example, what is going on in their community; what are local authorities doing; what
programs are available in their schools; what can they do, etc. I have increasingly come to believe that the lack
of this sort of ""personally relevant"" information at a time of crisis increases public anxiety and contributes to the
overall sense of things being out of control. We have begun to focus on this issue and have worked both in Haiti
and last year in Pakistan to provide people with a steady stream of information they can use. We are using a
wide array of communications tools to deliver these messages that allows the information to be delivered in a
very granular ,local, personal way. The other benefit of this approach is that it helps balance the steady stream
of gruesome news being put out by traditional media.
• Work with private sector in both Mexico and US to develop broad based PSA campaign to increase awareness of
the initiative and maintain public support for the effort
• Increase awareness in Mexico of USG efforts to combat drug use in US
Keith has reached out to a number of his associates at BDA and unfortunately he has met with some resistance to BDA
taking this project on. The personal safety issue seems to be the biggest concern. I do believe we will be able to
overcome this to some degree and I have some ideas which we can discuss when we next speak. In the meantime I have
reached out to Pat Mitchell of the Paley Center and she believes she will be able to help engage the US private sector
once we have a plan of action in place.
Finally, with regard to next week's trip by S, Jim feels it might be better for me to come to Mexico sometime in late April
rather than have it as part of next week's agenda. I am happy to do whatever works best for you. Keith is also prepared
to come next week or in April. Just let us know.
Judth"
4484,Ok
4485,"Spoke to Joe and he is on board and all set re IFI. One concern is that Trini Vargo (frmr EMK staffer) is trying to redirect
money from IFI to her Irish Am Alliance for Mitchell scholarships. She will not succeed.
We'll work it out."
4486,You should definitely read Ignatius this morning.
4489,"I had breakfast w/ Dan this morning, who weighed in strongly and to my mind compellingly"
4490,"Just came in from ops. Will send more info as we get it.
The FAA Operations Center reports a Qatari passenger aboard United Airlines flight 663 attempted to light his shoes on
fire and was detained by Federal Air Marshals. The flight was en route to Denver from Reagan National. FAA believes
the man may have some diplomatic status."
4492,FYI
4493,"Wow, that was fast - and great
Don't worry about the reporter reading the quotes back to you, we're recording and he'll have the transcript shortly. I'm
guessing we just caught him at a bad moment and he's not as flaky as he sounds"
4494,Fyi
4495,"Yes - was more than ok
And you've read my mind, will make sure he sees"
4496,"I will be out of the office Wednesday March 17 through Friday March 19. I won't be carrying a blackberry and will have
very little access to email. Please call me through ops if it is urgent. Otherwise, please email Mike Fuchs at
fuchsmh@state.gov."
4497,"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA©state.gov>
Thursday, April 8, 20104:23 PM
Slaughter, Anne-Marie
H; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; DiMartino, Kitty; Douglas, Walter T; Verveer, Melanne
recognition of USG assistance/contributions.
We all agree that there is a need to dramatically increase the awareness level of USG assistance efforts around the
world. Following up on conversations with Melanne and others, I would like to suggest that we begin the effort by
bringing together a small group of people from inside and outside government to help us think this through. USAID
participation will be crucial. I'd be happy to organize this and/or co-host the event with you. Let me know what you
think."
4499,Cool. Will tell Shaun.
4500,"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Friday, April 9, 2010 6:54 AM
H.
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
RE: recognition of USG assistance/contributions.
Will do. This is such a critical (and frustrating) issue that I want to try and start moving forward on it as soon as we can. I
know Raj wants to address this as well. I'd like to start off with a relatively small group of DoS and USAID reps, plus a
group top private sector brand and other ex erts. For exam .l
who is an incredible woman who is already helping me with youth engagement and who would B6
be terrific for this. In addition I'd like to reach out to people in the NGO and think tank community so we can get a broad
range of opinions.
Will keep you posted.
There is a difference of opinion within NEA that I am trying to sort out B5
but I will have something to you by next early week.
Finally, as I think you know,
I am working on a memo for you and Jim outlining the details.
im"
4501,Didn't rec name - will get
4502,"10:40 am ARRIVE State Department
10:45 am OFFICE TIME
11:30 am Secretary's Office
11:30 am PREP CALL w/TBD Secretary's Office
12:10 pm DEPART State Department *En route River Entrance, Pentagon
12:20 pm ARRIVE Pentagon
12:30 pm SUNDAY SHOW TAPINGS w/DEFENSE SECRETARY GATES
1:30 pm Secretary's Dining Room, 3E918
1:30 pm DEPART Pentagon *En route Andrews Air Force Base
1:55 pm ARRIVE Andrews Air Force Base
2:00 pm DEPART Andrews Air Force Base via Air Force Aircraft Tail #90404
En route Lexington, Kentucky
3:30 pm ARRIVE Louisville International Airport
3:35 pm DEPART Louisville International Airport
En route Papa John's Cardinal Stadium, University of Louisville
3:40 pm ARRIVE Papa John's Cardinal Stadium
3:45pm SPEECH AT THE MCCONNELL CENTER, UNIV. OF LOUISVILLE
5:20 pm Brown & Williamson Club *Papa John's Cardinal Stadium *Approx. 1100 ppl. attending.
5:25 pm DEPART University of Louisville
En route Louisville International Airport
5:30 pm ARRIVE Atlantic Aviation Terminal, Louisville International Airport
5:35 pm DEPART Louisville, Kentucky via Air Force Aircraft Tail #90404
En route White Plains, New York
7:05 pm ARRIVE Westchester County Airport, White Plains
7:15 pm DEPART Westchester County Airport *En route Private Residence
7:30 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
4504,Here he is.
4505,Fyi traffic
4506,"I don't know if you'll be speaking to Roza Otunboyeva, the interim leader in Kyrgyzstan, but if you do, it might be
interesting to mention that you know of her commitment to microcredit. She was instrumental in bringing FINCA to
Kyrgyzstan and when you made your trip there you saw what a difference it was making to lift up women and their
families. She also was her country's head of delegation to Beijing. She was foreign minister at the time and made a strong
statement about gender equality and the transformative power of microcredit. I think she had an overseas post when you
visited Kyrgyz so I don't think you met her.
I know it's a very complicated situation there now with our use of the base in potential jeopardy, but I thought this info
might be useful in some way assuming she manages to hold on.
I'm off to Lithuania, Russia and Egypt later today."
4507,From Lee b/I
4508,B/w noon and 1pm sun; also may call in one of windows today
4509,"Fyi -- not sure of timing of your call.
Terrible news about Poland.
I'm on the ground and reachable at your convenience."
4510,Perhaps my Cuba question from last night was ill-timed!
4511,"U ok with statement?
Statement by the Secretary
The Death of Polish President Kaczynski and His Delegation
I join President Obama in offering my deepest condolences to the people of Poland, to the Kaczynski family, and to the
families of all those killed in this tragedy. Lost alongside President Kaczynski and his wife were Polish leaders from
across the political spectrum, men and women who shaped and sped Poland's post-1989 democratic transformation and
were leading Poland into its promising future. The tragedy of these lives cut short will be felt deeply across the world,
but their legacy will live on in a free and flourishing Poland.
The United States stands with the Polish people in this difficult hour. Like the country he led, President Kaczynski was
one of America's most valued and trusted allies. He was well known in the United States as a champion for democracy
against an oppressive regime, a man whose journey took him from the Gdatisk Shipyards to the presidency of a free
people. President Kaczynski was an unstinting advocate for freedom and human rights not just in Poland, but around
the world. He will be long remembered and sorely missed.
The Polish people have endured more than their share of sorrow, but they have always shown resilience and resolve in
the face of adversity -- and I know they will pull- together in solidarity to grieve this loss.
My thoughts and prayers are with all the people of Poland today."
4512,Thx
4513,See below. Meeting with embassy folks now -- will report on that and dinner later.
4514,BlakeR2@State.gov
4515,Fyi
4516,Peres said something similiar recently. Let me track down.
4517,"See below from Mitchell. Will send an email with thoughts on Kabul later tonight.
The following is a summary
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 04/11/2030"
4518,FYI - Boeing has made a significant number of military sales to European countries. Can get you more details.
4519,Fyi
4520,">; Casper de Villiers
>; eiman.zein-elabdin
; katiestanton
p, Rene Simons
<sawsanhassan1
RELEASE IN PART
B6"
4521,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, March 20, 2010 11:26 AM
Oscar Flores
Abu Mazen
I understand you are ok making the abu mazen call. Everyone agrees you should make it and they want you to do it
today. Can you do after marianne?
Below are points."
4522,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Monday, April 12, 2010 9:20 AM
Fw: (AP) Northern Ireland picks justice minister in peace landmark"
4523,"Oh I apologize. Jake said he spoke with you about it and that you'd agreed to do it if mitchell recommended it. He does
recommend it, these are points from him about what to say. And they asked if you would do today.
III follow up."
4524,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, March 20, 2010 11:35 AM
Re: Abu Mazen
They are in the original email I sent and pasting again below. Oscar should have printed.
B5"
4525,"I hope you are having someone keep a scrapbook!
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
4526,"RELEASE IN FULL
See below — thoughts."
4527,Yup. Already did that.
4528,"8:00 am DEPART Private Residence *En route Washington Convention Center
8:20 am ARRIVE Washington Convention Center
8:30 am BILATERAL w/PM HSIEN LOONG LEE, SINGAPORE
8:45 am S Bilateral Room 148, Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
9:00 am BILATERAL w/FM MOURAD MEDELCI, ALGERIA
9:15 am S Bilateral Room 148, Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
9:30 am MORNING SESSION OF THE NUCLEAR SECURITY SUMMIT
11:30 am Plenary Room, Washington Convention Center
10:00 am BILATERAL w/TURKISH FM DAVUTOGLU
10:30 am S Bilateral Room 148, Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
10:45 am BILATERAL w/EGYPTIAN FM ABOUL GHEIT
11:15 am S Bilateral Room 148, Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
11:15 am BILATERAL w/FM TAIEB FASSI-FIHRI, MOROCCO
11:30 am S Bilateral Room 148, Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
11:40 am BILATERAL w/FOREIGN MINISTER KASIT, THAILAND
12:00 pm S Bilateral Room 148, Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
12:00 pm CO-HOST WORKING LUNCH w/ENERGY SEC'Y CHU FOR MEMBERS
1:10 pm OF DELEGATIONS Dining Room, Washington Convention Center
1:15 pm PLUTONIUM DISPOSITION AGREEMENT SIGNING w/RUSSIAN FM
1:30 pm SERGEY LAVROV Room 147A, Press Bfg Rm 2, Washington Convention Ctr.
1:30 pm POTUS PULL ASIDE w/ PRIME MINISTER ERDOGAN, TURKEY
1:45 pm Miniature Bilateral Room A, Outside of Plenary Session
Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
2:00 pm Al, IERNOON PLENARY SESSION OF THE NUCLEAR SECURITY
4:00 pm SUMMIT Plenary Room, Washington Convention Center
2:30 pm BILATERAL w/CHILEAN FM MORENO
3:00 pm S Bilateral Room 148, Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
3:15 pm BILATERAL w/BRAZILIAN FM AMORIM
3:45 pm S Bilateral Room 148, Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
4:00 pm BILATERAL w/PRIME MINISTER DUNG, VIETNAM
4:30 pm S Bilateral Room 148, Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
4:45 pm BILATERAL w/PRES1DENT SARGSIAN, ARMENIA
5:15 pm S Bilateral Room 148, Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
5:30 pm ONE-ON-ONE PULL-ASIDE w/FOREIGN SEC'Y DAVID MILIBAND
5:45 pm S Bilateral Room 148, Washington Convention Ctr *Camera spray at top.
6:00 pm POTUS BILATERAL w/GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERICEL
6:30 pm Room 152A, Washington Convention Center *Camera spray at top.
6:35pm (t) DEPART Washington Convention Center *En route Four Seasons Hotel
6:55 pm ARRIVE Four Seasons Hotel
7:00 pm BILATERAL w/PAKISTANI PRIME MINISTER GILANI
7:45 pm Room 476, Fourth Floor, Four Seasons Hotel *Camera spray at top.
7:50 pm DEPART Four Seasons Hotel *En route Private Residence
8:00 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
12:00 pm HEADS OF DELEGATION LUNCHEON
1:30 pm Leaders Dining Room
4:30 pm POTUS PRESS CONFERENCE
5:00 pm Press Room, Washington Convention Center
5:00 pm NUCLEAR SECURITY SUMMIT CLOSING RECEPTION
6:00 Pm Room Tbd, Washington Convention Center
###"
4529,"FYI see below - first time since 1968 that they've allowed privatization in the retail sector.
EXCLUSIVE - Cuba handing beauty, barber shops over to workers
Mon Apr 12, 2010 11:05pm 1ST
By Marc Frank
HAVANA (Reuters) - Communist Cuba is turning over hundreds of state-run barber shops and beauty salons to
employees across the country in what appears to be the start of a long-expected revamping of state retail services by
President Raul Castro.The measure marks the first time state-run, retail-level establishments have been handed over to
employees since they were nationalized in 1968.Barbers and hair dressers in telephone interviews from a number of
cities during the weekend said they would now rent the space where they work and pay taxes instead of receiving a
monthly wage.Those employees who do not wish to rent are being offered other jobs or retirement"
4531,"sbwhoeop
Saturday, March 20, 2010 5:54 PM
H: fyi. sid
H: Uri Avnery, the Israeli analyst and activist, is privately circulating this analysis today. One consequence: Petraeus
cannot run as a Republican. At least Putin didn't bring his big dogs in with him like he did with Merkel. Cheers, Sid
Uri Avnery
20.3.10
The Doomsday Weapon
IT IS already a commonplace to say that people who don't learn from history are condemned
to repeat their mistakes.
Some 1942 years ago, the Jews in the province called Palaestina launched a revolt against the
Roman Empire. In retrospect, this looks like an act of madness. Palestine was a small and
insignificant part of the world-wide empire which had just won a crushing victory against the
rival power — the Parthian Empire (Persia) — and put down a major rebellion in Britain. What
chances could the Jewish revolt have?
God knows what was going on in the mind of the ""Zealots"". They eliminated the moderate
leaders, who warned against provoking the empire, and gained sway over the Jewish
population of the country. They relied on God. Perhaps they also relied on the Jews in Rome
and believed that their influence over the Senate would restrain the Emperor, Nero. Perhaps
they had heard that Nero was weak and about to fall.
We know how it ended: after three years, the rebels were crushed, Jerusalem fell and the
temple was burned down. The last of the Zealots committed suicide in Masada.
The Zionists did indeed try to learn from history. They acted in a rational way, did not provoke
the great powers, endeavored in every situation to attain what was possible. They accepted
compromises, and every compromise served them as a basis for the next surge forward. They
cleverly utilized the radical stance of their adversaries and gained the sympathy of the whole
world.
But since the beginning of the occupation, their mind has become clouded. The cult of
Masada has become dominant. Divine promises once again start to play a role in public
discourse. Large parts of the public are following the new zealots.
The next phase is also repeating itself: the leaders of Israel are starting a rebellion against the
new Rome.
WHAT BEGAN as an insult to the Vice President of the United States is developing into
something far bigger. The mouse has given birth to an elephant.
Lately, the ultra-right government in Jerusalem has started to treat President Barack Obama
with thinly veiled contempt. The fears that arose in Jerusalem at the beginning of his term
have dissipated. Obama looks to them like a paper black panther. He gave up his demand for a
real settlement freeze. Every time he was spat on, he remarked that it was raining.
Yet now, ostensibly quite suddenly, the measure is full. Obama, his Vice President and his
senior assistants condemn the Netanyahu government with growing severity. Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton has submitted an ultimatum: Netanyahu must stop all settlement activity,
East Jerusalem included; he must agree to negotiate about all core problems of the conflict,
including East Jerusalem, and more.
The surprise was complete. Obama, it seems, has crossed the Rubicon, much as the Egyptian
army had crossed the Suez Canal in 1973. Netanyahu gave the order to mobilize all the
reserves in America and to move forward all the diplomatic tanks. All Jewish organizations in
the US were commanded to join the campaign. AIPAC blew the shofar and ordered its
soldiers, the Senators and Congressmen, to storm the White House.
It seems that the decisive battle has been joined. The Israeli leaders were certain that Obama
would be defeated.
And then an unusual noise was heard: the sound of the doomsday weapon.
THE MAN who decided to activate it was a foe of a new kind.
David Petraeus is the most popular officer of the United States army. The four-star general,
son of a Dutch sea captain who went to America when his country was overrun by the Nazis,
stood out from early childhood. In West Point he was a ""distinguished cadet"", in Army
Command and General Staff College he was No. 1. As a combat commander, he reaped
plaudits. He wrote his doctoral thesis (on the lessons of Vietnam) at Princeton and served as
an assistant professor for international relations in the US Military Academy.
He made his mark in Iraq, when he commanded the forces in Mosul, the most problematical
city in the country. He concluded that in order to vanquish the enemies of the US he must win
over the hearts of the civilian population, acquire local allies and spend more money than
ammunition. The locals called him King David. His success was considered so outstanding
that his methods were adopted as the official doctrine of the American army.
His star rose rapidly. He was appointed commander of the coalition forces in Iraq and soon
became the chief of the Central Command of the US army, which covers the whole Middle East
, except Israel and Palestine (which ""belong"" to the American command in Europe).
When such a person raises his voice, the American people listen. As a respected military
thinker, he has no rivals.
THIS WEEK, Petraeus conveyed an unequivocal message: after reviewing the problems in his
AOR (Area Of Responsibility) — which includes, among others, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran,
Iraq and Yemen — he turned to what he called the ""root causes of instability"" in the region. The
list was topped by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
In his report to the Armed Services Committee he stated: ""The enduring hostilities between
Israel and some of its neighbors present distinct challenges to our ability to advance our
interests in the AOR...The conflict foments anti-American sentiment, due to a perception of
U.S. favoritism for Israel. Arab anger over the Palestinian question limits the strength and
depth of U.S. partnerships with governments and peoples in the AOR and weakens the
legitimacy of moderate regimes in the Arab world. Meanwhile, al-Qaeda and other militant
groups exploit that anger to mobilize support. The conflict also gives Iran influence in the
Arab world through its clients, Lebanese Hizballah and Hamas.""
Not content with that, Petraeus sent his officers to present his conclusions to the Joint Chiefs
of Staff,
In other words: Israeli-Palestinian peace is not a private matter between the two parties, but a
supreme national interest of the USA. That means that the US must give up its one-sided
support for the Israeli government and impose the two-state solution.
The argument as such is not new. Several experts have said more or less the same in the past.
(Immediately after the 9/11 attacks, I wrote in a similar vein and prophesied that the US would
change its policy. It did not happen then.) But now this is being stated in an official document
written by the responsible American commander.
The Netanyahu government immediately went into damage-limitation mode. Its
spokespersons declared that Petraeus represents a narrow military approach, that he doesn't
understand political matters, that his reasoning is faulty. But it is not this that made people in
Jerusalem break out into cold sweat.
AS IS well known, the pro-Israel lobby dominates the American political system without limits
— almost. Every American politician and senior official is mortally afraid of it. The slightest
deviation from the strict AIPAC line is tantamount to political suicide.
But in the armor of this political Goliath there is a chink. Like Achilles' heel, the immense
might of the pro-Israel lobby has a vulnerable point that, when touched, can neutralize its
power.
It was illustrated by the Jonathan Pollard affair. This American-Jewish employee of a sensitive
intelligence agency spied for Israel. Israelis consider him a national hero, a Jew who did his
duty to his people. But for the US intelligence community, he is a traitor who endangered the
lives of many American agents. Not satisfied with a routine penalty, it induced the court to
impose a life sentence. Since then, all American presidents have refused the requests of
successive Israeli governments to commute the sentence. No president dared to confront his
intelligence chiefs in this matter.
But the most significant side of this affair is reminiscent of the famous words of Sherlock
Holmes about the dogs that did not bark. AIPAC did not bark. The entire American Jewish
community fell silent. Almost nobody raised their voice for poor Pollard.
Why? Because most American Jews are ready to do anything — just anything — for the
government of Israel. With one exception: they will not do anything that appears to hurt the
security of the United States. When the flag of security is hoisted, the Jews, like all Americans,
snap to attention and salute. The Damocles sword of suspicion of disloyalty hangs above their
heads. For them, this is the ultimate nightmare: to be accused of putting the security of Israel
ahead of the security of the US. Therefore it is important for them to repeat endlessly the
mantra that the interests of Israel and the US are identical.
And now comes the most important general of the US Army and says that this is not so. The
policy of the present Israeli government is endangering the lives of American soldiers in Iraq
and Afghanistan.
FOR NOW, this is being said only as a side remark, in a military document that has not been
widely aired. But the sword has been drawn from its scabbard - and American Jews have
started to tremble at the distant rumble of an approaching earthquake.
This week, Netanyahu's brother-in-law has used our own doomsday weapon. He declared that
Obama is an ""anti-Semite"". The official newspaper of the Shas party has asserted that Obama
is really a Muslim. They represent the radical right and its allies, who argue in speech and in
writing that ""Hussein"" Obama is a Jew-hating black who must be beaten in the coming
congressional elections and in the next presidential ones.
(Yet an important poll in Israel published yesterday shows that the Israeli public is far from
convinced by these insinuations: the vast majority believes that Obama's treatment of Israel is
fair. Indeed, Obama got higher marks than Netanyahu.)
If Obama decides to fight back and activate his doomsday weapon - the accusation that Israel
puts the lives of American servicemen at risk - this would have catastrophic consequences
for Israel.
For the time being, this is only a shot across the bow - a warning shot fired by a warship in
order to induce another vessel to follow its instructions. The warning is clear. Even if the
•present crisis is somehow damped down, it will inevitably flare up again and again as long as
the present coalition in Israel stays in power.
When the movie ""Hurt Locker"" won its awards, the entire American public was united in its
concern about the lives of its soldiers in the Middle East. If this public becomes convinced
that Israel is sticking a knife in their back, it will be a disaster for Netanyahu. And not just for
him."
4532,"Shaun writes me: Two polls tomorrow will show massive support in NI for HC Agreement. Also two thirds of UUP voters
support the agreement and also devolution now. Reg isin effect totally detached and in danger of no longer leading his
Party!
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
4533,"sbwhoeop
Tuesday, April 13, 2010 6:35 PM
H: If this poll holds, Labour has a majority. 1st debate thu. Sid
• Print this page
From Times Online
April 14, 2010
Tory lead narrows amid huge voter
disenchantment, Times poll finds
olmage :1 of 20,
Peter Riddell
The general election race is tightening, according to a Populus poll for The Times that reveals deep public
disenchantment with the campaign so far.
The poll, undertaken yesterday and this morning, says that more voters are now hoping for a hung parliament than either
a Tory or a Labour outright victory.
Conservative support has slipped by three points over the past week to 36 per cent, while Labour is a point up at 33 per
cent. The Liberal Democrats are unchanged on 21 per cent.
The polls tend to fluctuate by a couple of points either way. and these shifts are within the margin of error of the average.
With other new polls pointing to a firming in Labour support, the party may have enjoyed a small boost from its manifesto
launch. Tory strategists will hope to have achieved a boost from its manifesto launch today.
If the Populus figures were repeated in the general election in three weeks' time, and there is a uniform switch in votes,
Labour would be the largest single party, with about 300 MPs, ahead of the Tories on 264 and the Lib Dems on 54. This
would point to a Lab/Lib Dem coalition. But many analysts do not expect a uniform national swing.
The latest poll shows that 32 per cent of the public now hope for a hung parliament (as opposed to expecting one),
against 28 per cent wanting a Tory majority and 22 per cent a Labour one. Lib Dem voters prefer a deal with Labour than
the Tories in a hung parliament, by 44 to 31 per cent. The public is evenly split 40 to 42 per cent about whether they want
Labour or the Tories in either a majority or a minority government.
The poll shows that the number expecting a Tory overall majority has risen by three points to 34 per cent over the past
week. This only just exceeds the number expecting a hung parliament, at 33 per cent, down six points compared with a
week ago. Overall, 57 per cent expect the Tories to be the largest party, against 29 per cent expecting Labour to be.
The public is deeply sceptical about the honesty of the parties. Only 4 per cent think that they are being completely honest
about their tax plans, 61 per cent partly honest. Only 6 per cent say they are being completely honest about cutting the
deficit and 61 per cent partly honest. Some 7 per cent say that they are being completely honest about the extent to which
they can fund their policies by cutting waste and 58 per cent partly honest.
Voters were asked to say which party had proposed eight key manifesto pledges. They wrongly identified four: reducing
the increase in national insurance contributions (naming Labour not the Tories); allowing unsuccessful schools, hospitals
and the police (the Tories, not Labour); tightening up takeover rules (the Tories not Labour); and requiring foreign workers
employed in public services to speak fluent English (the Tories not Labour).
In only one case, the £150-a-year tax break, did more than half of voters (60 per cent) correctly identify the party making
the proposal.
In most cases, the pledge will make little difference to people's votes, apart from three made by Labour: the foreign
workers language pledge, doubling paid paternity leave and allowing the takover of unsuccessful schools, hospitals etc.
More than two fifths (43 per cent), including 50 per cent of women, say ""none of the parties"", or ""don't know"", when asked
which party is putting across a convincing cases to voters. This compares with 25 per cent naming the Tories and 18 per
cent Labour.
Just over half the public (54 per cent) plan to watch the first televised leaders' debate on Thursday evening. Men and
middle class professionals are more likely to say that they will view. More than two fifths (42 per cent) expect David
Cameron to win the debate, against 22 per cent for Gordon Brown. More Tories (70 per cent) than Labour voters ( 57 per
cent) expect their leader to win.
Two fifths of the public (42 per cent, up one point on a week ago) say it seems like a change from Labour, but are not sure
that it is time for a change to the Conservatives. Some 33 per cent, down one point, think it is time for a change to the
Tories.
Populus interviewed a random sample of 1,525 adult voters on April 12 to 13. Interviews were conducted across the
country and have been weighted to be representative of all adults. For more details go to www.populus.co.uk.
Contact our advertising team for advertising and sponsorship in Times Online, The Times and The Sunday Times, or
place your advertisement.
Times Online Services: Dating I Jobs I Pro_pertv Search I Used Cars I HoEiden I Births Marriages Deaths I
Subscriotionq I E.-paper
News International associated websites: Milkround I Giobrix
Copyright 2010 Times Newspapers Ltd.
This service is provided on Times Newspapers' standard Terms and Conditions. Please read our Privacy Policy.To inquire
about a licence to reproduce material from Times Online, The Times or The Sunday Times, click here.This website is
published by a member of the News International Group. News International Limited, 1 Virginia St, London E98 1XY, is
the holding company for the News International group and is registered in England No 81701. VAT number GB 243 8054
69."
4534,"Just spoke with him. Gordon screwed up with business on national insurance tax, strings pulled by peter. Cameron
manifesto launch was very good. But, but, but... The dogs really are wary of that dog food, hence Times poll tonight. Also
peter gunning for David's job. David aware. The security conf was boffo.
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
4535,To dc from ny at 9am so will call later - what works?
4536,"Madam Secretary,
Jake asked me to send you a brief update on the effort to create an internal USG website for housing interagency
information about the attitudes, concerns, and media habits of foreign audiences (following up on the memo INR sent to
you on this subject in February).
INR is working with the interagency to create six initial country pages (Indonesia, Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, and
Yemen) on this website. In addition to background information about each country and its relationship with the United
States, each page will focus on providing up to date information on how local audiences view the United States and an
analysis of the mediums through which local audiences get their news. Pages will also include a list effective messaging
themes that would resonate with target audiences in each country.
In the coming weeks, INR will be receiving interagency feedback on these initial draft web pages, and will be seeking
guidance as to which additional countries should be covered. The hope is that each page will evolve over time based on
user feedback.
Please let me know if you would like any further information.
Thanks,
Mike
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. De artment of State"
4537,"8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am WEEKLY MEETING w/REGIONAL BUREAU SECRETARIES
10:00 am Deputy Secretary's Conference Room
10:15 am PRIVATE MEETING
10:25 am Secretary's Office
10:30 am PREP SESSION FOR POTUS MEETING
11:45 am Secretary's Office
11:55 am DEPART State Department *En route Iglesias Conference Center
12:10 pm ARRIVE Iglesias Conference Center
12:10 pm KEYNOTE REMARKS AT ENERGY AND CLIMATE PARTNERSHIP
12:40 pm OF THE AMERICAS (EPCA) MINISTERIAL LUNCHEON
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)
12:40 pm DEPART Iglesias Conference Center *En route State Department
12:55 pm ARRIVE State Department
1:00pm PRE-BRIEF f/ TURKISH BILAT w/JAKE SULLIVAN
1:15pm Secretary's Office
1:15 pm BILATERAL w/TURKISH FM AHMET DAVUTOGLU
2:00 pm Secretary's Conference Room *Camera Spray in Treaty Room preceding.
2:00 pm OFFICE TIME
2:30 pm Secretary's Office
2:30pm PHONE CALL w/NORWEGIAN FM JONAS STOERE
2:45pm Secretary's Office
2:45pm OFFICE TIME
3:30pm Secretary's Office
3:30 pm REMARKS AT THE DEPARTMENT'S ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON
3:40 pm INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY (ACIEP) Room 1107
4:00 pm INTERVIEW w/DANIEL DOMBEY, FINANCIAL TIMES
4:30 pm Secretary's Office
4:30 pm MEETING w/PHIL GOLDBERG
5:00 pm Secretary's Office
5:00 pm MEETING w/SPEECH WRITING TEAM
5:30 pm Secretary's Office
5:30 pm OFFICE TIME
7:00 pm Secretary's Office
7:00 pm DEPART State Department *En route The W Hotel
7:10 pm ARRIVE The W Hotel
7:15 pm REMARKS AT THE DEDICATION OF THE S. DANIEL ABRAHAM
7:45 pm CENTER FOR MIDDLE EAST PEACE The W Hotel, Altitude Ballroom, Roof Level
7:50 pm DEPART The W Hotel *En route Private Residence
8:05 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
4538,"Below is a proposed statement to go out in an hour or so. Also, did you see the Pakistanis arrested Adam Gadhan, the
American al Qaeda spokesman?
STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
IRAQI NATIONAL ELECTIONS
I congratulate all the people of Iraq who participated in national elections today and over the past three days. There is
no better rebuke to the violent extremists who seek to derail Iraq's progress. Our thoughts and prayers are with the
families who lost friends and loved ones, and we salute the determination of the Iraqi people to reaffirm their
commitment to democracy and to charting their own future free of fear and intimidation.
Thanks to the efforts of the Iraq High Electoral Commission and the Iraqi Security Forces, which organized the voting and
ensured security at thousands of polling sites throughout the country, Iraqi men and women from all parts of the
country were able to go to the polls and choose their leaders freely.
I also would like to commend Ambassador Hill, General Odierno and all the U.S. civilian and military personnel who
supported this historic effort.
Iraqis have chosen a new government to lead their country at a critical time. In the coming months, we will work
together with Iraqi leaders as our partnership continues its transition to a primarily civilian focus, with the goal of
building a long-term, multidimensional relationship between our two nations - a relationship that will contribute to
stability in the Middle East and growing peace and prosperity in Iraq.
###"
4539,Fyi
4540,"I am likely going to go to bed early and be up early.
Hope you had a chance to go through ppt.
cdm"
4541,FYI
4542,Thnx. I am happy to do the introduction.
4543,"For wjc too
Met w/opposition senators for two hours yesterday in Haiti re IHRC.
Bill passed.
Work b/gs.
Cdm"
4544,"If you would like for your blackberry:
Rev. Dr. Bill Shillady [SHILL-uh-dee]
United Methodist City Society
Executive Director
###"
4545,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, March 21, 2010 8:34 AM
Re: H: fyi. sid
I will send you a memo this morning
Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
4546,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 16, 2010 4:57 AM
Fw: Press Release: Chairman Eliot Engel Praises Energy and Climate Partnership of the
Americas
Fyi"
4547,###
4548,Ok
4549,FYI
4550,Hope you have a great weekend.
4552,"See his last point.
cdm
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, April 17, 2010 3:48 PM
FW: Haiti
— Reason: 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 04/17/2025"
4553,He's asking us to schedule it. He's on his way home now and said he can do in the next few hours.
4554,"Ill ask about 7
And make sure he can connect to a white phone."
4555,"7 with jim is fine
Call from your white phone when u r ready and they will connect you."
4556,"For filing: My immediate take on the Oscars is that it was Hollywood's re-voting of the 2008 primaries, not giving it to the
""Avatar"" but to the tough woman. Sid"
4557,FY1
4558,Fyi
4560,Coming soon.
4561,Whenever you like. What works? I can have ops reach out and build.
4562,"UUP policing meeting with McGuinness breaks
down after three minutes
Latest row comes on eve of critical vote in Stormont assembly on transfer of justice powers from London to Belfast
• Henry McDonald, Ireland correspondent
• quardian.co.uk, Monday 8 March 2010 17.36 GMT
• Article history
A meeting between the Ulster Unionists and Northern Ireland's deputy first minister aimed at securing the party's support
for the devolution of policing and justice broke down in acrimony this evening.
The encounter between Martin McGuinness and a UUP delegation lasted all of three minutes at Stormont.
The latest row comes on the eve of a critical vote in the Stormont assembly on transferring justice and policing powers
from London to Belfast. The UUP has indicated it will not support the last act of devolution because they believe the entire
power-sharing executive is dysfunctional.
Sir Reg Empey, the UUP leader, told the Guardian last month his party would not support the transfer of these powers
unless it obtained concessions on education — specifically the retention of academic selection to grammar schools at 11.
Following the aborted meeting today, the UUP released a statement condemning both McGuinness and Peter Robinson,
the first minister, who is leader of the rival Democratic Unionist party. The UUP claimed it had been ejected from the
deputy first minister's office.
A UUP spokesman said: ""An ill-tempered deputy first minister attempted to aggressively lecture the Ulster Unionist party
on policing and justice. He ridiculously accused us of being an anti-agreement party. Our delegation robustly reminded the
deputy first minister that we were the party which brought power-sharing government to Stormont.
""Quite clearly dissent and disagreement are unacceptable to Sinn Fein — unfortunately for Mr McGuinness, a party voting
against a motion with which it disagrees is basic, normal democratic politics.""
The spokesman added that McGuinness's ""angry and aggressive attempt to lecture"" the UUP was ""wholly unacceptable"".
""When challenged on his tone, the meeting broke down. The UUP will not take lectures on our commitment to devolution
from Martin McGuinness.
""If this is how Sinn Fein understands power-sharing, then it is small wonder that the [Northern Ireland] executive is
dysfunctional.""
If the DUP and Sinn Fein press ahead with the vote it is highly likely that the leader of the centrist, non-sectarian Alliance
party, David Ford, will become the first justice minister for Northern Ireland.
The SDLP will back the transfer of policing and justice powers in the Assembly tomorrow. However the nationalist party is
angry that it is not being offered the justice ministry. Under the rules governing the hand-out of ministries in the power-
sharing government the SDLP are officially entitled to choose the next ministry.
The party opposes the appointment of Ford as justice minister but will still support the transfer of these powers as they
want to be seen to continue to back the power-sharing arrangement.
US Congress warns Cameron over danger of
failed Ulster police deal
Yes vote on Hillsborough agreement would see policing and criminal justice powers devolved to Belfast next month
• Nicholas Watt, chief political correspondent
• guardian.co.uk, Sunday 7 March 2010 22.12 GMT
• Article history
US secretary of state Hillary Clinton is said to be concerned at Cameron's apparent failure to exert pressure on his UUP
partners. Photograph: Karim Jaafar/AFP/Getty Images
David Cameron has been given a stark warning from Washington that dissident terrorists will be ""emboldened"" to intensify
their attacks in Northern Ireland and millions of dollars of US investment will be threatened if he fails to persuade the
Tories' Ulster Unionist partners to endorse the final stage of the peace process.
In a sign of deep unease in Washington at the Tories' electoral pact with the UUP, a bipartisan group of US Congress
members have demanded Cameron must ""aggressively"" encourage his partners to endorse the deal in a vote in the
Northern Ireland assembly on Tuesday.
""At this defining moment in the peace process, it is crucial that all the political parties speak with one voice about their
shared future,"" the members of Congress wrote in a private letter to Cameron.
Without a unanimous vote, they said, the province's elected officials would be sending the wrong message to the people
they represent, and to the world.
""Dissidents are trying to destabilise the political institutions and turn the clock back ... These dissidents will continue to be
emboldened if they sense there is no political unanimity on the way forward ... The challenge of bringing good jobs to
Northern Ireland will be made more difficult if potential investors do not believe there is political stability.""
The letter by congressional leaders of the 41 million-strong Irish-American community has been passed to the Guardian
before the crucial vote on last month's Hillsborough agreement between Sinn Fein and the Democratic Unionists.
A yes vote would see policing and criminal justice powers devolved to Belfast next month in what the British government
has dubbed the final piece in the jigsaw of the 1998 Good Friday agreement.
The congressmen and women, whose views reflect the private misgivings of the US secretary of state, Hillary Clinton,
wrote to Cameron after learning that his electoral partners in Northern Ireland were voicing doubts about endorsing the
deal. Clinton is said to be alarmed that Cameron has either failed, or not bothered, to warn the UUP of the dangers of
obstructing the deal.
A Tory source said: ""David Cameron has consistently made clear that we support the devolution of policing and criminal
justice powers ... We welcomed the agreement between the DUP and Sinn Fein. The final details are for the parties in the
executive, working as a four-party coalition, to decide. We hope that between now and Tuesday any outstanding issues
can be solved.""
The Hillsborough agreement was brokered last month under a system endorsed by the UUP when it was the largest party
in Northern Ireland. This says that any change must have the consent of 50% of both the nationalist and Unionist
communities and 50% of the assembly.
Sir Reg Empey, the UUP leader who was one of the architects of the Good Friday agreement, will meet his party's
executive tomorrow night to decide how to vote.
The deal could still be passed tomorrow without the support of the UUP because the DUP's 36 assembly members
account for more than 50% of the unionist bloc. But there are fears in Washington that a no vote from the UUP, seen as a
moribund force until Cameron breathed new life into it, would destabilise many members of the DUP and undermine
support for the devolution of policing and criminal justice powers.
US eyes on Northern Ireland in countdown to
crucial peace vote
Hillary Clinton, the White House and Congressional leaders look for a yes vote in Belfast
By Nick Watt
Guardian
For a few hours tomorrow, the United States will turn its attention to Northern Ireland. Democratic and Republican leaders
will both be watching to see whether all mainstream political parties endorse the final stage in the implementation of the
Good Friday Agreement: the devolution of policing and criminal justice powers.
Sir Reg Empey, the leader of the Ulster Unionist party, is meeting his executive tonight to decide whether to vote yes.
Empey has severe doubts about the deal between Sinn Fein and the Democratic Unionist party. This would see policing
and criminal justice powers devolved to Belfast next month — a key nationalist demand — in return for the long-standing
unionist demand for a review of the way in which contentious parades are run.
Intense pressure is being placed on Empey to fall into line. Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state who has taken a keen
interest in Northern Ireland since the peace process was launched in the early days of her husband's presidency, spent
15 minutes talking to Empey by phone, according to BBC Northern Ireland.
But transatlantic pressure has also been brought to bear on the other side of the Irish Sea. I reported this morning that a
group of bipartisan US Congressmen have written to David Cameron asking him to use his influence with the UUP, which
recently formed an electoral pact with the Tories, to vote yes.
The unease among the US Congress members is shared by Hillary Clinton. She is said to believe that Cameron would be
well advised to follow the example of John Major, who was respected as an impartial referee.
The concerns in the US will raise questions about claims made in private recently by William Hague. The shadow foreign
secretary is saying that, despite their political differences, he is forging a strong bond with Clinton.
But all sides need to be careful. The Tories, who support the deal between Sinn Fein and the DUP, believe that ministers
need to be careful about frightening the UUP with too much political pressure. The government was this morning
trumpeting a poll, commissioned by them, which showed overwhelming support among UUP voters for a yes vote. But, as
Slugger O'Toole notes, there is some debate about the methodology.
""It almost feels like the government want the UUP to vote no so they can draw one of Gordon Brown's beloved dividing
lines and say we are to blame for it all going wrong,"" one Tory tells me."
4563,"FYI, see below. I will send the Guardian article in a moment.
Look forward to discussing."
4564,"US Congress warns Cameron over danger of failed
Ulster police deal
Yes vote on Hillsborough agreement would see policing and criminal justice powers devolved to Belfast next
month
David Cameron has been given a stark warning from Washington that dissident terrorists will be ""emboldened""
to intensify their attacks in Northern Ireland and millions of dollars of US investment will be threatened if he
fails to persuade the Tories' Ulster Unionist partners to endorse the final stage of the peace process.
In a sign of deep unease in Washington at the Tories' electoral pact with the UUP, a bipartisan group of US
Congress members have demanded Cameron must ""aggressively"" encourage his partners to endorse the deal in
a vote in the Northern Ireland assembly on Tuesday.
""At this defining moment in the peace process, it is crucial that all the political parties speak with one voice
about their shared future,"" the members of Congress wrote in a private letter to Cameron.
Without a unanimous vote, they said, the province's elected officials would be sending the wrong message to
the people they represent, and to the world.
""Dissidents are trying to destabilise the political institutions and turn the clock back ... These dissidents will
continue to be emboldened if they sense there is no political unanimity on the way forward ... The challenge of
bringing good jobs to Northern Ireland will be made more difficult if potential investors do not believe there is
political stability.""
The letter by congressional leaders of the 41 million-strong Irish-American community has been passed to the
Guardian before the crucial vote on last month's Hillsborough agreement between Sinn Fein and the Democratic
Unionists.
A yes vote would see policing and criminal justice powers devolved to Belfast next month in what the British
government has dubbed the final piece in the jigsaw of the 1998 Good Friday agreement.
The congressmen and women, whose views reflect the private misgivings of the US secretary of state, Hillary
Clinton, wrote to Cameron after learning that his electoral partners in Northern Ireland were voicing doubts
about endorsing the deal. Clinton is said to be alarmed that Cameron has either failed, or not bothered, to warn
the UUP of the dangers of obstructing the deal.
A Tory source said: ""David Cameron has consistently made clear that we support the devolution of policing and
criminal justice powers ... We welcomed the agreement between the DUP and Sinn Fein. The final details are
for the parties in the executive, working as a four-party coalition, to decide. We hope that between now and
Tuesday any outstanding issues can be solved.""
The Hillsborough agreement was brokered last month under a system endorsed by the UUP when it was the
largest party in Northern Ireland. This says that any change must have the consent of 50% of both the nationalist
and Unionist communities and 50% of the assembly.
Sir Reg Empey, the UUP leader who was one of the architects of the Good Friday agreement, will meet his
party's executive tomorrow night to decide how to vote.
The deal could still be passed tomorrow without the support of the UUP because the DUP's 36 assembly
members account for more than 50% of the unionist bloc. But there are fears in Washington that a no vote from
the UUP, seen as a moribund force until Cameron breathed new life into it, would destabilise many members of
the DUP and undermine support for the devolution of policing and criminal justice powers."
4565,Jon should've printed new draft about 30 mins ago.
4566,"Yes, I am asking for new date options.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(202) 647-9071 (direct)"
4567,"1.4(D)
B1
03/08/2020"
4568,FYI
4569,"George Bush to David Cameron: don't derail
Northern Ireland peace process
Exclusive: Former president urges Cameron to rein in Unionist partners
• Nicholas Watt
• quardian.co.uk, Monday 8 March 2010 21.20 GMT
• Article history
Former US president George Bush has called David Cameron over his concerns for the Northern Ireland peace process.
Photograph: Andrew Parsons/PA
The former US president George Bush has made a direct plea to David Cameron to support the Northern Ireland peace
process, amid widespread concern in the US about the Tories' new electoral pact with the Ulster Unionists.
In his most active intervention since leaving the White House, Bush took the rare step of calling the Conservative leader to
ask him to use his influence to press his unionist partners to endorse the final stages of the 15-year search for a
settlement.
Bush, who took a close interest in the peace process during his years in the White House, telephoned Cameron last
Friday to ask him to plead with the UUP leader, Sir Reg Empey, to endorse the deal in a vote tomorrow in the Northern
Ireland assembly.
Democrats and Republicans fear that the peace process could be undermined if the Ulster Unionist party, formerly
Northern Ireland's largest party, which governed the province until direct rule was imposed in 1972, votes against the
devolution of policing and criminal justice powers to Belfast.
While the UUP does not have enough votes to scupper the deal, the White House fears a no vote from the UUP could
undermine support for the settlement within the Democratic Unionist party and among the wider unionist community.
Cameron has faced intense pressure in recent months over his decision to form an electoral pact with the UUP, which
could provide him with crucial support if the general election leads to a hung parliament. The pact has prompted fears in
Washington that Cameron may abandon the even-handed approach to Northern Ireland adopted by John Major in the
early years of the peace process.
The Guardian understands that the White House is so concerned that the US economic envoy to Northern Ireland, Declan
Kelly, persuaded Bush to intervene. The former president telephoned Cameron to ask him to use his influence to
persuade Empey to vote for the deal.
""There was a feeling that a conservative to conservative conversation was the right way to go about this,"" said one source
familiar with the transatlantic negotiations. ""This conversation was borne out of the concern that Empey is holding out.""
Another source familiar with the contact said: ""This is the most active thing George W Bush has done in his post-
presidency period. He has been incredibly restrained and diplomatic since leaving the White House. He has maintained
radio silence.""
One source familiar with thinking on Northern Ireland on both sides of the Atlantic added: ""The fact that George W Bush
has decided to intervene is really significant. He was interested in the peace process as president and appointed an
envoy. It is a general sign of how concerned people are in the US about what David Cameron is up to.""
A Tory source said: ""George Bush did have a conversation with David Cameron. It was a positive conversation. David
underlined his commitment to the agreement and said we are doing all we can to support it. But he said that we cannot
force Sir Reg to vote for it. George Bush thanked David and said, 'I can see you are engaged.""
The disclosure of Bush's intervention came as Empey met the executive of his party tonight to decide whether to endorse
the deal brokered last month at Hillsborough Castle between Sinn Fein and the Democratic Unionists that would see
policing and criminal justice powers devolved to Belfast next month.
B6
The UUP leader, who is minister for employment and learning in the four-party power sharing executive, believes it is
foolish to devolve the final set of powers while the coalition is struggling to function. In a sign of Empey's unease about
endorsing the deal, a meeting between the UUP and the Sinn Fein deputy first minster, Martin McGuinness, broke up
after just three minutes tonight.
The White House and political leaders across the spectrum in the US have been watching developments with care. Hillary
Clinton, the US secretary of state, today pleaded with Empey in a 15-minute telephone call to support the deal.
A group of US Congress members wrote to Cameron last month to issue a stark warning that dissident terrorists will be
""emboldened"" to intensify their attacks if he fails to persuade the Tories' partners to endorse the final stage of the peace
process."
4571,FYI
4573,"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanii@state.gov>
Tuesday, March 9, 2010 7:40 AM
H
Re: Libya
B5
I was thinking the same thing after Jeff's latest missive last night."
4574,Roger
4575,"yes, within about 15 min. Have been writing and also talking it out with Joe Wilson. Coming very soon."
4577,"rs kt.sk-T.t.o 4 v3:31A,.strif
me:me,
X -
SOPING fr
IAa
piNiorpi § • qiNel tAIS RFS; 1
111-0,INVitIViat""). 4:SW
1
1
-"",
' ,;■ ,1410,45.
.
W „44-4,4
1
E10: „9
: ,
4.
4,r
4fr
. :
w‘
if!'4f i,
-
Time to break the fog of Middle East politics
By David Ignatius
Sunday, March 21, 2010; A19
Diplomats love ambiguity. It allows them to fuzz up the hard parts of a negotiation -- the ""final status"" issues, as they're
often called -- and save them for later, when the parties are more amenable to pressure.
This devotion to ""constructive ambiguity"" has been a hallmark of U.S. peacemaking on the Palestinian-Israeli issue for 40
years. Rather than state the unpalatable concessions that most analysts recognize will be required for any viable
settlement -- that Israelis must share sovereignty in Jerusalem and that Palestinians must give up the ""right of return"" to
Israel -- successive U.S. administrations have tried to defer these unmentionables until later.
But the fog machine blew apart this month, when the isr3e1Interipr i‘,1!inista_rndLinced du
..ripq. visit ily__Vde President
Biden that Israel would build 1,600 more housipg priits in ,lerusal.
erp. The Obama administration was upset, to put it
mildly: Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called the housing announcement a ""deeply negative signal"" about U.S.-Israeli
relations and ""an insult.""
In the ensuing hubbub over the ""crisis"" in U.S.-Israeli relations, there have been frantic attempts to pretend it was all a
misunderstanding and pull the cloak of ambiguity back over the peace process. But that's a mistake.
The East Jerusalem move wasn't an accident but an emphatic public statement of the Israeli right's rejection of
concessions on Jerusalem. Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu had been trying to play along with U.S. requests to fuzz
the issue by avoiding provocative actions on Jerusalem. But the right-wing Shas party, which controls the Interior Ministry,
basically called his bluff.
""Freezing building in East Jerusalem is one of those things we cannot do,"" said Dore Gold, a right-wing former Israeli
ambassador to the United Nations. And Avigdor Lieberman, the Israeli foreign minister and a settler himself, responded:
""Can you imagine if they told Jews in New York they could not build or buy in Queens?""
So what should the administration do, now that the Israeli right has put Jerusalem squarely on the table despite the best
efforts of the ambiguity-addicted diplomats?
The administration's best strategy is to do what it considered a year ago, which is to state clearly the basic principles that
must frame these negotiations. Those guidelines have been articulated well by Zbigniew Brzezinski, the former national
security adviser: real sharing of Jerusalem; no right of return for the Palestinians; a return to the 1967 borders, with mutual
adjustments to allow for big Israeli settlement blocks; and a demilitarized Palestinian state. Every negotiation for the past
four decades has converged toward those parameters.
The Obama administration debated whether to issue such a statement of principles a year ago, when it began its
peacemaking effort. Launching negotiations with this ""big bang"" made sense to some officials, including Gen. Jim Jones,
the national security adviser, But George Mitchell, the Middle East envoy, argued that based on his experience in the
Northern Ireland peace talks, it was better to let the parties haggle before the United States stepped in with bridging
proposals.
Rather than stating U.S. negotiating principles at the outset, the Obama team decided instead to push Netanyahu on
settlements. The administration picked this fight in the flush of President Obama's first months in office, confident that he
was so strong and Netanyahu so weak that if it came to a showdown, Netanyahu would cave. The Israeli leader coolly
bided his time, dickering about procedural issues while Obama got weaker politically by the month. Netanyahu finally
agreed in November to a temporary moratorium on new settlements -- but it excluded Jerusalem. The administration
should have seen what was coming.
In retrospect, it seems clear that the step-by-step approach was a mistake: Constructive ambiguity, in this case, proved
destructive. It allowed the Israeli right wing to perpetuate the idea that it could have it all -- obtain a peace deal without
making concessions on Jerusalem. And it allowed Netanyahu to continue his straddle.
Jerusalem is the hardest issue of all in the Israeli-Palestinian negotiation, and for that reason, would-be peacemakers
have wanted to save it for last. But this month's crisis makes that strategic waffling impossible. Thanks to the Israeli right,
the Jerusalem issue is joined.
What's needed now is for Obama to announce that when negotiations begin, the United States will state its views about
Jerusalem and other key issues -- sketching the outlines of the deal that most Israelis and Palestinians want. If Netanyahu
refuses to play, then we have a real crisis in U.S.-Israeli relations.
davidignatius_@washpost.corn
Post a Comment
View all comments that have been posted about this article.
Comments that include profanity or personal attacks or other inappropriate comments or material will be removed from the
site. Additionally, entries that are unsigned or contain ""signatures"" by someone other than the actual author will be
removed. Finally, we will take steps to block users who violate any of our posting standards, terms of use or privacy
policies or any other policies governing this site. Please review the NI1 Riles governing commentaries and discussions.
You are fully responsible for the content that you post.
© 2010 The Washington Post Company"
4578,"I am on travel with the Secretary and have very irregular email access. If you need to reach me urgently, please call the
State Department Operations Center. Otherwise, Ill get back to you the week of March 22.
Thanks,
Tomicah"
4579,"Shaun just called. Vote just happened. UUP unanimously voted against. DUP held firm. Agreement passed. You might
call Shaun and Robinson and McGuinness to congratulate. More later. Sid Sent via Cingular Xpress Mail with Blackberry"
4580,Yes -- I'm finalizing the visuals now and should have it for you in the next half hour.
4581,"in subsequent stories. Sid
&It;SCRIPT language='JavaScript1.1' SRC=""http://ad-
emea.doubleclick.net/adj/N6010.133705.0666409185621/B4336495;abr=!ie;sz=468x60;click=http://ads.guardian.co.uk/ev
ent. ng/Type=click&amp; Flig htl D=143552&am p;Adl D=165203&amp;TargetID=42700&amp;Values=239&amp; Redirect=;or
d=lnxvsy,bfzndNmgnupsj?""&gtAlt;/SCRIPT&gt; &It; NOSCRI PT&gt; &It;A
HREF=""http://ads.guardian.co.uk/event.ng/Type=click&amp;Flight1D=143552&amp;AdID=165203&amp;TargetID=42700&
am p;Values=239&amp; Red irect=http://ad-
emea.dou blecl ick. net/jump/N6010.133705.0666409185621/B4336495;abr=lie4;abr=!ie5;sz=468x60;ord=lnxvsy, bfzndNmg
nupsj?""&gt; &It;IMG SRC=""http://ad-
emea.doubleclick.net/ad/N6010.133705.0666409185621/B4336495;abr=lie4;abr=!ie5;sz=468x60;ord=lnxvsy, bfzndNmgnu
psj"" BORDER=0 WIDTH=468 HEIGHT=60&gt&IVA&gt; &It;/NOSCRIPT&gt;
e
FaiFL§uardian.co.uk V] [Search]
UUP rejects Tory plea and votes against
devolution of policing powers
New justice ministry is created without backing of Conservative allies in Stormont
• Comments (...)
• Henry McDonald and Andrew Sparrow
• quardian.co.uk, Tuesday 9 March 2010 17.37 GMT
•
Ulster Unionist leader Sir Reg Empey walks past a TV monitor displaying the Northern Ireland chamber meeting at
Stormont in Belfast today. Photograph: Peter Muhly/AFP/Getty Images
The final part of the Northern Ireland devolution deal was put in place today, giving the province its first justice minister
since the Troubles erupted four decades ago.
Nationalists and unionists in the Stormont parliament voted together to create the new justice ministry, completing the last
act of the Good Friday agreement.
But there was discord inside the Stormont parliament after the Conservatives' allies in Northern Ireland, the Ulster
Unionists, and their 18-strong assembly team, voted against the move.
Despite an 11th hour intervention by David Cameron imploring the UUP to vote yes, the party refused to back the historic
measure.
The party's stance puts Cameron in a difficult position: he is in favour of the devolution of justice to Belfast, but his
electoral pact with the UUP risks exposing him to criticism that a Conservative government could not claim to be an
""honest broker"" when there are disagreements between the parties at Stormont.
Today's vote came just before 5pm, when 88 assembly members from Sinn Fein and the DUP joined the SDLP and
smaller parties to back the transfer of policing and judicial powers to Belfast.
But the UUP resisted pressure — from, among others, former US president George Bush — to support the measure.
Speaking on the assembly floor, Sir Reg Empey, the UUP leader, said his party had voted no ""as a democratic political
to a friend
hare
end
IL
i
r•
ontact us
er I smaller
party pledged to making power-sharing work in an inclusive manner for all the people of Northern Ireland, and we exercise
our rights refusing to bow to the blackmail and bullying to which we have been subjected in recent weeks.""
The deputy first minister, Sinn Fein's Martin McGuinness, earlier denounced the UUP stance, claiming it was intended to
embarrass the DUP.
""The UUP declared last night that they will not support this resolution,"" McGuinness told the assembly.
""That saddens and disappoints me. They are opposed in my view to the transfer for cynical party political reasons.""
In a statement after the vote, Gordon Brown praised the parties which backed the deal. ""Today the politics of progress
have finally replaced the politics of division in Northern Ireland,"" the prime minister said. ""The completion of devolution,
supported by all sections of the community in Northern Ireland, is the final end to decades of strife. It sends the most
powerful message to those who would return to violence: that democracy and tolerance will prevail.
""The courage and leadership of the parties who voted to complete devolution at Stormont will be noted around the world.""
The Conservatives welcomed the vote, without mentioning the UUP's rejection of the move. A Tory spokesman said: ""We
welcome the fact that devolution of policing and justice is going to happen. We wanted all four parties to be involved and
for it to be decided by local politicians.""
But the Liberal Democrats called on Cameron to ""clarify the position of his Tory-UUP alliance on the devolution of policing
and justice powers"".
Alistair Carmichael, their spokesman on Northern Ireland, said: ""With the UUP saying one thing, and the Tories saying the
complete opposite, voters will struggle to understand what exactly joint Tory-UUP candidates stand for. What we're seeing
is the Tories in complete disarray. When it takes George Bush to step in as the voice of reason, it's clear that David
Cameron has dug himself a very big hole.""
Carmichael added: ""This raises serious questions about David Cameron's judgment. If he can't manage to steer a straight
course in opposition, how on earth would he cope as prime minister?""
Earlier there was acrimony in the Great Hall at Stormont when a victims' campaigner attempted to serve a civil writ against
McGuinness.
Willie Frazer of the group Families Acting for Innocent Relatives threw the legal document in McGuinness's direction after
the deputy first minister refused to take it off him. Frazer is taking a civil action in Belfast high court against the Sinn Fein
MP because he alleges McGuinness directed the IRA's campaign during the Troubles. The south Armagh unionist's father
was shot dead by the IRA.
The FAIR spokesman said he had chosen yesterday because the DUP ""had betrayed me and other victims"" by agreeing
to devolve policing and justice powers. Frazer predicted that Sinn Fein would exercise a major influence over the police
and judiciary even though the centrist, non-sectarian Alliance party leader, David Ford, will be the first justice minister.
Frazer said: ""I am very disappointed in the DUP because for years they said the things victims wanted to hear and now
they have done a complete somersault. All along they told me that Sinn Fein would never get their hands on policing and
justice but they have a say. Mr Ford is answerable to the executive and that means the deputy first minister, Martin
McGuinness. That is why the only action left to me is a civil action. I feel very let down by a number of DUP people.""
The DUP will suffer at the polls for this U-turn, Frazer predicted.
rintable version
Email
Close
Recipient's email address
Your first name
Your surname
Add a note (optional)
[Send]
Your IP address will be logged
Share
Close
• Digq
• reddit
• Google Bookmarks
• Twitter
• delicious
• StumbleUpon
• Newsvine
• livejournal
• Facebook
• Mixx it!
Contact us
Close
• Contact the Politics editor
politics.editorA
guardianunlimited.co.uk
• Report errors or inaccuracies: userhelpguardian.co.uk
• Letters for publication should be sent to: lettersguardian.co.uk
• If you need help using the site: userhelpguardian.co.uk
• Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard:
+44 (0)20 3353 2000
o Advertising guide
o License/buy our content
Politics
• Northern Irish politics •
• Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) •
• Conservatives
UK news
• Northern Ireland •
• Police
More news
• More on this story
• We will not be bullied, says UUP leader
• Henry McDonald: Americans hold the key
• UUP-Conservative alliance: a risky strategy
• Nicholas Watt: Cameron tempts Bush out of retirement
• Editorial: The Tories and the peace process
Related
9 Mar 2010
We will not be bullied, says UUP leader Sir Reg Empey
8 Mar 2010
rintable version
Ulster Unionist party policing meeting with Martin McGuinness breaks down after three minutes
13 May 2009
Ulster Unionist MP will not stand as Tory candidate
6 Apr 2009
Northern Ireland first minister claims Tories and UUP colluding over expenses stories
Email
Close
Recipient's email address
Your first name
Your surname
Add a note (optional)
[Send]
Your IP address will be logged
Share
Close
• Digq
• redd it
• Gooqle Bookmarks
• Twitter
• delicious
• StumbleUpon
• Newsvine
• livejournal
• Facebook
• Mixx it!
Contact us
Close
• Contact the Politics editor
politics.editora
quardianunlimited.co.uk
• Report errors or inaccuracies: userhelpaguardian.co.uk
• Letters for publication should be sent to: lettersaguardian.co.uk
• If you need help using the site: userhelp(a,guardian.co.uk
• Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard:
+44 (0)20 3353 2000
•
o Advertising guide
o License/buy our content
About this article
Close
Northern Ireland: UUP rejects Tory plea and
votes against devolution of policing powers
This article was published on quardian.co.uk at 17.37 GMT on Tuesday 9 March 2010. It was last modified at 17.49 GMT
on Tuesday 9 March 2010.
&It;SCRIPT language='JavaScript1.1 SRC=""http://ad-
emea.doubleclick.net/adj/N6010.133705.0666409185621/B4336495.4;abr=lie;sz=120x600;click=http://ads.guardian.co.uk
/event. ng/Type=click&amp; Flight1D=143551&amp;AdID=165202&amp;TargetID=42701&amp;Values=239&amp;Redirect=
;ord=zobmbz,bfzndNngnupsw?""&gtAlt;/SCRIPT&gt; &It; NOSCRI PT&gt; &It;A
HREF=""http://ads.guardian.co.uk/event.ng/Type=click&amp;Flight1D=143551&amp;AdlD=165202&amp;TargetID=42701&
amp;Values=239&amp;Redirect=http://ad-
emea.doubleclick.net/jump/N6010.133705.0666409185621/B4336495.4;abr=lie4;abr=lie5;sz=120x600;ord=zobmbz,bfznd
Nngnupsw?""&gt; &It;IMG SRC=""http://ad-
emea.doubleclick.net/ad/N6010.133705.0666409185621/B4336495.4;abr=lie4;abr=lie5;sz=120x600;ord=zobmbz,bfzndN
ngnupsw"" BORDER=0 WIDTH=120 HEIGHT=600&gt&IVA&gt; &It/NOSCRIPT&gt;
GUERR (52) 2010-03-09 18:12:27,514
Latest from politics
• Most viewed
• Latest
• Most commented
GUERR (52) 2010-03-09 18:12:21,341
Last 24 hours
1. 1. George Bush to David Cameron: don't derail Northern Ireland peace process (165 comments)
2. 2. Jon Venables case: time for a political truce I Michael White (151)
3. 3. Eric Pickles distances Tory party from rightwinq training organisation (132)
4. 4. Alan Johnson on Tory crime policy — live (71)
5. 5. We will not be bullied, says UUP leader Sir Reg Empey (67)
Section classified
Guardian holiday offers
• Our choice
• Most popular
zi 0
Bruges by Eurostar - 3 nights from £249
•
0 0
Uzbekistan - 11 nights from £1395
1. Brussels Jazz Marathon
2. Classical Spain
3. William Morris: A Great Victorian
4. Discover the Nile
5. Venice, Florence & Rome - A Tale of Three Cities
Javascript must be turned on in order to see the most popular holiday offers
Find hand-picked holidays to hundreds of destinations
Enter place name [Search]
• Browse all Guardian holiday offers
• Sign up to Guardian holiday offers email
Find your MP
Enter name of the MP[ ] [Go]
Enter postcode or placename[ ] [Go]
Or browse the map I About this search
Latest news on guardian.co.uk
Last updated less than one minute ago
• News
First woman to die in Afghanistan 'badly trained'
• Sport
England raise security after bugging
Free P&P at the Guardian bookshop
.REo Arsenic Century
o £16.99 with free UK delivery
o Music Instinct
o £20.00 with free UK delivery
• Browse more politics books
• Sponsored features
•
•
•
• UK
• USA
USA
Search all jobs [Go]
Browse all jobs
{for result in results} <II> <h4> <a href=""${resulturl}'>${result.jobtitle}</a> </h4> <p> <span class=""description"">${
result.snippet }<span> <span class=""location"">${ result.state }<span> </p> </li> {/for}
• Inscription House Health Center, Phy America Government Services, Inc. (AZPA)
Facility: Phy America Government Services, Inc... Primary Care PhyAmerica Government Services, Inc.
contracts with state and government agencies to provide... AZ
• VA Medical Center, Phy America Government Services, Inc.
Job #243167 Company / Facility: Phy America Government Services, Inc. VA Medical Center Location... shift.
PhyAmerica Government Services, Inc. is an... GA
• Human Terrain Systems Team Leader - PPL *
years military or government experience at 0-5 or above (0-4 USMC) or IA - 4 Level or equivalent OR - 3+ years
civilian or government management experience... KS
jobs by
Ads by Gooqle
• Need Health Insurance?
Compare Affordable Health Insurance Online - Rates from $30 / Month!
Affordable-Health-Insurance.orq
• Probate Lawyers.
Skilled lawyers providing personal attention in Probate matters.
www.LSSLawyers.com/
• Introducing Kates Haddock
Try Our New Special Dish, Kate's Haddock! Locate A Restaurant Now
www.BonefishGrill.com
Related information
Politics
• Northern Irish politics •
• Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) •
• Conservatives
UK news
• Northern Ireland •
• Police
atish and Irish PMs endorse Northern Ireland power-sharing deal
5 Feb 2010:
Gordon Brown and Brian Cowen endorse a deal to give Northern Ireland its first justice minister in one of the boldest
steps since the 1998 Good Friday peace agreement
More video
27 Feb 2009
Tories promise to make Northern Ireland special tax zone as they link up with UUP
7 Dec 2008
'I want Ulster Unionists in cabinet', says David Cameron
5 Dec 2008
lain Dale: An enlightened merger of Ulster Unionists and Conservatives
13 Jun 2002
UUP may merge with Tories
51
eace.protesters gather across Northern Ireland
11 Mar 2009:
Thousands gather across Northern Ireland to hold silent vigils in protest against the murders of two soldiers and a
policeman by dissident republicans
More galleries
• License/buy our content I
• Privacy policy I
• Terms & conditions I
• Advertising guide I
• Accessibility I
• A-Z index I
• Inside guardian.co.uk blog I
• About guardian.co.uk
• Join our dating site today
• guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media Limited 2010
Go to: [guardian.co.uk V] [Go]"
4582,"He cannot do 7.
Asking if you can do 8pm?"
4583,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, April 17, 2010 6:24 PM
Re: Haiti
They are on board philosophically but don't know how much he would say vis-a-vis Raj"
4584,"Have you seen this story? I look forward to discussing.
Gates Says U.S. Lacks Strategy to Curb Iran's Nuclear Drive
By DAVID E. SANGER and THOM SHANKER
Published: April 18, 2010
WASHINGTON - Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates has warned in a secret three-page memorandum to top White
House officials that the United States does not have an effective long-range policy for dealing with Iran's steady progress
toward nuclear capability, according to government officials familiar with the document.
Several officials said the highly classified analysis, written in January to President Obama's national security adviser, Gen.
James L. Jones, touched off an intense effort inside the Pentagon, the White House and the intelligence agencies to
develop new options for Mr. Obama. They include a revised set of military alternatives, still under development, to be
considered should diplomacy and sanctions fail to force Iran to change course.
Officials familiar with the memo's contents would describe only portions dealing with strategy and policy, and not
sections that apparently dealt with secret operations against Iran, or how to deal with Persian Gulf allies.
One senior official, who like others spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitive nature of the memo,
described the document as ""a wake-up call."" But White House officials dispute that view, insisting that for 15 months
they had been conducting detailed planning for many possible outcomes regarding Iran's nuclear program.
In an interview on Friday, General Jones declined to speak about the memorandum. But he said: ""On Iran, we are doing
what we said we were going to do. The fact that we don't announce publicly our entire strategy for the world to see
doesn't mean we don't have a strategy that anticipates the full range of contingencies - we do.""
But in his memo, Mr. Gates wrote of a variety of concerns, including the absence of an effective strategy should Iran
choose the course that many government and outside analysts consider likely: Iran could assemble all the major parts it
needs for a nuclear weapon - fuel, designs and detonators - but stop just short of assembling a fully operational weapon.
In that case, Iran could remain a signatory of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty while becoming what strategists call a
""virtual"" nuclear weapons state.
According to several officials, the memorandum also calls for new thinking about how the United States might contain
Iran's power if it decided to produce a weapon, and how to deal with the possibility that fuel or weapons could be
obtained by one of the terrorist groups Iran has supported, which officials said they considered to be a less-likely
possibility.
Mr. Gates has never mentioned the memo in public. His spokesman, Geoff Morrell, declined comment on specifics in the
document, but issued a statement on Saturday saying, ""The secretary believes the president and his national security
team have spent an extraordinary amount of time and effort considering and preparing for the full range of
contingencies with respect to Iran.""
Pressed on the administration's ambiguous phrases until now about how close the United States was willing to allow.
Iran's program to proceed, a senior administration official described last week in somewhat clearer terms that there was
a line Iran would not be permitted to cross.
The official said that the United States would ensure that Iran would not ""acquire a nuclear capability,"" a step Tehran
could get to well before it developed a sophisticated weapon. ""That includes the ability to have a breakout,"" he said,
using the term nuclear specialists apply to a country that suddenly renounces the nonproliferation treaty and uses its
technology to build a small arsenal.
Nearly two weeks ago, Mr. Obama, in an interview with The New York Times, was asked about whether he saw a
difference between a nuclear-capable Iran and one that had a fully developed weapon. ""I'm not going to parse that right
now,"" he said. But he noted that North Korea was considered a nuclear-capable state until it threw out inspectors and,
as he said, ""became a self-professed nuclear state.""
Mr. Gates has alluded to his concern that intelligence agencies might miss signals that Iran was taking the final steps
toward producing a weapon. Last Sunday on the NBC News program ""Meet the Press,"" he said: ""If their policy is to go to
the threshold but not assemble a nuclear weapon, how do you tell that they have not assembled? I don't actually know
how you would verify that."" But he cautioned that Iran had run into production difficulties, and he said, ""It's going slow -
slower than they anticipated, but they are moving in that direction.""
Mr. Gates has taken a crucial role in formulating the administration's strategy, and he has been known over his career to
issue stark warnings against the possibility of strategic surprise.
Some officials said his memo should be viewed in that light: as a warning to a relatively new president that the United
States was not adequately prepared.
He wrote the memo after Iran had let pass a 2009 deadline set by Mr. Obama to respond to his offers of diplomatic
engagement.
Both that process and efforts to bring new sanctions against Iran have struggled. Administration officials had hoped that
the revelation by Mr. Obama in September that Iran was building a new uranium enrichment plant inside a mountain
near Qum would galvanize other nations against Iran, but the reaction was muted. The next three months were spent in
what proved to be fruitless diplomatic talks with Iran over a plan to swap much of its low-enriched uranium for fuel for a
medical reactor in Tehran. By the time Mr. Gates wrote his memo, those negotiations had collapsed.
Mr. Gates's memo appears to reflect concerns in the upper echelons of the Pentagon and the military that the White
House did not have a well-prepared series of alternatives in place in case all the diplomatic steps finally failed. In fact,
just before Mr. Gates issued his warning, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Mike Mullen, wrote an official
""chairman's guidance"" to his staff saying that while any military option would have ""limited results"" against Iran's
nuclear facilities, preparations needed to be stepped up.
""Should the president call for military options, we must have them ready,"" the admiral wrote.
Administration officials testifying before a Senate committee last week made it clear that those preparations were under
way. So did General Jones. ""The president has made it clear from the beginning of this administration that we need to be
prepared for every possible contingency,"" he said in the interview. ""That is what we have done from day one, while
successfully building a coalition of nations to isolate Iran and pressure it to live up to its obligations.""
At the same hearing before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Lt. Gen. Ronald L. Burgess Jr., director of the Defense
Intelligence Agency, and Gen. James E. Cartwright, the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and one of the military's
most experienced officers on nuclear matters, said that Iran could produce bomb-grade fuel for at least one nuclear
weapon within a year, but that it would probably need two to five years to manufacture a workable atomic bomb.
The administration has been stepping up efforts to contain the influence of Iran and counter its missiles, including
placing Patriot anti-missile batteries, mostly"
4585,"(wanted to give you some brief observations from my trip to Lithuania. First of all, their friendship with the US and
respect for you was much in evidence on all levels. Most of the cabinet turned out for the reception that the amb hosted
for me. The FM went out his way to tell me what it meant to get a call from you when he assumed his position (he's
hoping to have a few mins with you in Tallin). As far as Lith has to go, it has achieved some remarkable achievements for
Eastern Eur. They have a female president, Speaker, Finance minister and def. minister. I had a good meeting with the
President and thanked her for Lith commitment to our collective efforts in afghanistan. They run the smallest PRT and,
despite a tough economy, have done everything we've asked in terms of additional support since the surge. The meeting
with the Speaker and top women members of the parl'nt was yet another reminder of your inspiration over many years.
One of the women was at the Vienna W conf and said she's in politics today because of you. Another read about safe
birthing kits in your book and was inspired to send several thousand to Afghanistan. They are eager for more
opportunities to work together.
I came primarily to launch the new working group on gender that we and Lith are co-chairing. There was much gratitude
for our leadership with them in the Community of Democracies.
The meaning of democracy is so strong for people who had to stuggle for it more recently. They really feel this is an
important time to renew the understanding of democ, particularly after the bruising it underwent over the last several
years.
We had terrific turnout from other countries, many comments about you and references to Beijing and Iceland W conf.
(So many people told me the impact Vienna and Iceland had on them). We left our meeting with many commitments for
future concrete projects that will be undertaken. There is great hope that you will be in Krakow in July for the CD
ministerial. The Lith CD coordinator headed to Belgium the next day for an EU meeting. He told me he got a very positive
response for our gender initiative and that Ashton was particularly excited about it. The EU is locating their new gender
institute in Lithuania and they are ager for our help.
The Dutch minister who came
said the outcome of their election in June will say much about the nature of their ongoing commitment in Afg.
Lastly, I arrived shortly after the Polish tragedy. There is a very close relationship between the 2 countries and their grief
was palpable. Jolenta Kwasniewska and several other Poles came to the CD meeting. She told me that they lost so many
of their top leaders across all sectors of society, incl several top women leaders. Jolenta' foundation has been very active
in advancing women's progress in Poland as well as working in other countries."
4586,"sbwhoeop
Tuesday, March 9, 2010 10:45 PM
H: FYI, a little collaboration in the spirit of postpartisanship. Sid
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/joe-wilson/emcourage-and-consequence_b_492602.html?view=print
March 9, 2010
Joseph C. Wilson
Courage and Consequence: Less Memoir Than
Hoax
Karl Rove's book Courage and Consequence is less memoir than hoax. The chapters that relate to the CIA leak scandal
are yet another attempt to deflect attention from his central role in the betrayal of Valerie Plame Wilson's identity as a
covert CIA officer.
His distortions and fabrications are consistent with his approach throughout this sordid and criminal affair. Wasting his
opportunity to tell the truth, he offers absolutely nothing new, and his selective use of facts and quotes are a transparent
effort to continue his long campaign to confuse people, unfortunately consistent with his past behavior.
His book is a pathetically weak defense of the disastrous policies pursued by the Bush administration, involving our
country in a war of choice based on false intelligence and badly tarnishing the good name of the United States of America.
Nothing in Karl Rove's book refutes those facts. His book, however, is illuminating in further exposing his political
methods, especially his reliance on personal insults, not simply towards Valerie and myself, but also towards all those
who opposed his unprincipled behavior.
If any additional proof to the irrefutable historical record were needed, Rove's book demonstrates once again the actions
of a vindictive, angry and petty man. Karl Rove betrayed his nation; now he has betrayed history.
Most Popular on HuffingtonPost
ic8B%2FZr%2BTve/o2FZmOUDCPhOfsL3fraN DZ7C1mceztZ%2FwKnab1e6N LC8C%2 Fc3vN RqWkrP1gCRQ179Hsm BC
FB36MIHQ`
)/03D%3D
NkxiHotNvaMBvS1Wd8FxHW6t54evrcfDEhUpq1kgmlCu0GbdUFMOVy6zrxRkzTtEQvX8tNyCK6VxiLL0SxJQqA°/03D%3D
1 of 2
Palin
—Crossed Border For Canadian Health Care
11,161 Comments
I
OscErs Breast Dressed: Who Wore Cleavage Best? (PHOTOS)
385 Comments
-1
Obaffia LIVE: Watch Video, Twitter Commentary
5,038 Comments
Alec Baldwin Thoughts on Hosting the 2010 Academy Awards
565 Comments
Rev.-
James Martin, S.J. Glenn Beck to Jesus: Drop...
1 281 Comments
lET
Katy-Hall 'Green Zone': The 'Bourne Team Takes On...
220 Comments
ftIJ
Shoff Film Producer Elinor Burkett Hijacks Speech In Oscar...
1 095 Comments
Oscirs 2010 WORST-DRESSED: See Who Bombed The Red Carpet...
245 Comments
The7 Lamest Moments From This Year's Oscars
534 Comments
Don't Miss HuffPost Bloggers
1 of 5
Ailic Baldwin
Thoughts on Hosting the 2010 Academy Awards
adonna
Sharing an Inspiring Story on International Women's Day
Hot Trends
army col. kim jong-ryul harry markopolos jesse ventura karen salmansohn karl rove
Get Breaking News Alerts
HuffPost Social News connects you with friends and the news
-
Follow Huffington Post
et Email Alerts »
HUFFPOST'S BIG NEWS PAGES
0
Bank
-Of America Overdraft Fees Dropped: Bank Will End Fees By Summer 2010
Financial Crisis
Bob Barker Loves PETA, Donates $2.5 Million For New Offices
PETA
lET
All The Most Ridiculous Parts Of The Eric Massa/Glenn Beck Interview In Under One Minute (VIDEO)
Glenn Beck
Mahmoud al-Mabhouh Assassination: The New York City Connection
Dubai
EL
Gibbs Fires Back At Chief Justice Roberts Over Obama Criticism
Su reme Court
Obarfia Foreclosure-Prevention Plan Lagging, New Data Shows (EXCLUSIVE)
Timoth Geithner
Jihad Jane, Colleen LaRose, Recruited Terrorists And Plotted Murder, Prosecutors Say
Ireland
IT
Toyola Stuck Accelerator Tips: What To Do If Your Car Suddenly Accelerates
Cars
Jessre Spano's Caffeine Intake (GRAPH)
Funny Pictures
more big news pages))
• Home
• Politics
• Media
• Entertainment
• Sports
• Comedy
• Business
• Living
• Style
• Green
• Technology
• World
• Books/NYR
• Impact
• N.Y.
• L.A.
• Chicago
• Denver
• Video
• Blogger Index
• Advertise I
•
• Make HuffPost your Home Page I
• RI
• Jobs I
• FAQ: Comments & Moderation I
• FAQ: Huffpost Accounts I
• Contact Us
• Copyright @ 2010 HuffingtonPost.com, Inc. I
• Archive I
• User Agreement I
• Privacy I
• Comment Policy I
• About Us I
• Powered by Movable Type
HuffPost Lightbox ."
4588,"841t;SCRIPT language='JavaScript1.1' SRC=""http://ad-
emea.doubleclick.net/adj/N6010.133705.0666409185621/B4336495;abr=!ie;sz=468x60;click=http://ads.guardian.co.uldev
ent.ngiType=click&amp;Flight1D=143552&amp;AdlD=165203&amp;TargetlD=42700&amp;Values=3263&amp;Redirect=;
ord=bNzdlpy,bfzocfybnvaqg?""&gtAlt;/SCRIPT&gt; &It; NOSCRIPT&gt; 8,1t;A
HREF=""http://ads.guardian.co.uldevent.ng/Type=click&amp; Flight1D=143552&amp;Adl D=165203&amp;TargetID=42700&
amp;Values=3263&amp; Red irect=http://ad-
emea.doubleclick. netiump/N6010.133705.0666409185621/84336495; abr=!ie4;abr=!ie5; sz=468x60;ord=bNzdl py, bfzocfyb
nvaqg?""&gt; &It;IMG SRC=""http://ad-
emea.doubleclick.net/ad/N6010.133705.0666409185621/B4336495;abr=!ie4;abr=!ie5;sz=468x60;ord=bNzdlpy,bfzocfybny
aqg"" BORDER=0 WIDTH=468 HEIGHT=60&gtAlt;/A&gt; 8,1t;/NOSCRIPT&gt;
iãiiTuardian.co.uk V] [Search]
Stormont votes to take over Northern Ireland
policing powers
•Power-sharing finalised as assembly agrees to first justice minister since Troubles
•Ulster Unionists oppose measure but Hillary Clinton welcomes assembly's yes vote
A 15-year search for a political settlement in Northern Ireland cleared its final hurdle today when unionists and nationalists
voted to transfer policing and criminal justice powers to Belfast, creating the province's first justice minister since the
Troubles erupted four decades ago.
Sinn Fein and the Democratic Unionist party (DUP), who were barely on speaking terms a few years ago, joined forces
with the nationalist SDLP in the Northern Ireland assembly to endorse a deal on policing, hammered out last month.
The justice minister will be appointed on 12 April and is likely to be David Ford, the leader of the centrist Alliance party.
The breakthrough was marred by a row when the Ulster Unionist party (UUP), which governed Northern Ireland for five
decades until the imposition of direct rule in 1972, voted against the deal.
Sir Reg Empey, the UUP leader, who recently formed an electoral pact with the Conservatives, said he had voted no
because his party did not believe that the four-party power-sharing executive was functioning properly. Empey, the
minister for employment and learning, said: ""We exercise our rights, refusing to bow to the blackmail and bullying to which
we have been subjected in recent weeks.""
The UUP hit out after facing intense pressure from London and the US to fall in behind David Cameron, who has backed
devolution of the criminal justice system. Gordon Brown phoned Empey shortly before today's vote, while former US
president George Bush pleaded with Cameron last week to persuade the UUP to support the deal.
Empey's unionist rivals, the DUP, who have overtaken the UUP in recent years, focused on what could happen after the
vote. The DUP leader, Peter Robinson, who managed to persuade all but one of his 36 assembly members to back the
devolution deal, said: ""The move is about completing and maintaining devolution, it is about whether we move forward
together as a society.""
The vote secures an extra £800m for policing and justice that Brown promised the assembly if they backed the transfer. It
also adds an extra 1,200 police officers. The prime minister praised the main parties for reaching the deal on an issue that
almost broke the power-sharing government.
He said: ""Today the politics of progress have finally replaced the politics of division in Northern Ireland. The completion of
devolution, supported by all sections of the community in Northern Ireland, is the final end to decades of strife. It sends
the most powerful message to those who would return to violence: that democracy and tolerance will prevail. The courage
and leadership of the parties who voted to complete devolution at Stormont will be noted around the world.""
The vote was also praised tonight by Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state. She
said: ""I commend the Northern Ireland Assembly for its affirmation of the
Hillsborough Agreement and its endorsement of the devolution of policing and
justice, an important step in ensuring a peaceful and prosperous future for all of the
people of Northern Ireland for generations to come.""
Irish president Mary McAleese also hailed the move. ""Today's vote in the Northern Ireland assembly represents an
eloquent statement of confidence in the political institutions established under the Good Friday Agreement,"" she said.
Matt Baggott, chief constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland, welcomed the vote as a step forward. ""Devolution
will strengthen our service. It will help to ensure communities receive the policing service that not only they deserve, but
that we are committed to delivering.
""The financial package is also welcomed ... it will help us deal with those who are living in the darkness of the past and
who have tried to disrupt this process and the lives of our community.""
But there was discord inside Stormont after the UUP and their 17-strong assembly team voted against the move.
Martin McGuinness, Sinn Fein's deputy first minister, denounced the UUP stance, claiming they were doing it to
embarrass the DUP. ""The UUP declared last night [Monday] that they will not support this resolution,"" McGuinness told
the assembly. ""That saddens and disappoints me. They are opposed in my view to the transfer for cynical party political
reasons."" He stressed that no single party could control the justice department.
The UUP no-vote will put pressure on the Tories, who will campaign with their allies in the general election, having taken
opposing sides on the biggest vote since the DUP and Sinn Fein started sharing power in 2007.
Cameron insisted that the Tories had played a constructive role, saying he would maintain his alliance with the UUP. ""We
want to move Northern Ireland politics forward — to focus on the issues that affect people in their everyday lives — rather
than remaining stuck in the past. That is why we remain totally committed to bringing national, mainstream UK politics to
Northern Ireland and to ending its semi-detached political status.""
Cameron's remarks were designed, in part, to reassure the White House, which fears a UUP no-vote could harden
unionist opinion against power-sharing.
Hardline Unionists turned on the DUP tonight. Jim Allister, the former DUP MEP, who now leads the breakaway
Traditional Unionist Voice, claimed his former party had ""rolled over in triple somersaults for Sinn Fein"". He also
suggested the new justice minister would be a ""pointless puppet keeping the seat warm for Sinn Fein"". Prior to the vote
the widow of the first Police Service of Northern Ireland officer to be murdered by dissident republicans urged all parties to
back the devolution of policing and justice powers. Kate Carroll, whose husband, Stephen, was killed by a Continuity IRA
sniper, said in an appeal to the UUP: ""It is heartbreaking that I have to get on this morning to please ask the politicians to
get on with their job."""
4590,"FYI — I'm sure you saw.
cdm"
4591,"FYI. Mostly good news. I am already focusing on Turkey. Met with my Turkish counter-part last week and have a trip
planned for early June.
I'll keep you posted as things move forward. Will also send you an email on the high side about my SSCI hearing last
week.
— Reason: 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 04/19/2020
1.4(D)
B1"
4592,Roger.
4594,FYI
4595,FYI.
4596,"Joint Statement by Former President Clinton and Secretary of State Clinton on the Passing of Dr. Dorothy Height We are
deeply saddened to learn of the passing of Dr. Dorothy Height, an icon of America's long march toward equality and a
personal inspiration to us both. As the only woman among the ""Big Six"" civil rights leaders, Dr. Height helped galvanize a
movement that changed our country forever. She organized the ""Wednesdays in Mississippi"" meetings that brought
black and white women together to find common ground and break down barriers. She never stopped fighting for what
she knew was right. And through it all, she was always the best dressed woman in the room. We were blessed to know
Dr. Height, to benefit from her grace, passion and wisdom, and to call her our friend. For decades, starting with the early
days at the Children's Defense Fund, we worked with her, learned from her, and drew inspiration from her example.
From the Presidential Medal of Freedom, to the Congressional Gold Medal, to the unveiling of a long-sought-after bust
of Sojourner Truth in the United States Capitol, we had the privilege of helping honor Dr. Height and her
accomplishments. Born before women had the right to vote, denied access to the college of her choice because of the
color of her skin, and witness to nation divided, Dr. Height dedicated her life to the proposition that all Americans should
have the opportunity to live up to their full God-given potential. Our nation is poorer for her loss but infinitely richer for
the life she led, the progress she achieved, and the people she touched. Our thoughts and prayers are with Dr. Height's
family today, and with her many loving friends and colleagues. She would be the first to tell us that the best way to
honor her memory is to carry forward the work she started and the causes she championed, to open wide the freedom
gates. May we all find the strength and the wisdom to live up to her legacy."
4598,"Basically if they can get their teams in from brussels tomorrow morning (a day before nato starts), its moving forward.
We should know approx 6am our time. However, if we need to be wheels up at 8am, that's too short notice. I just told
ivo we need to lean on them to make a decision sooner. Will keep u posted but we are def getting the sense they want
to move forward."
4599,"For this year:
Chile is going to Alex Wolfe
Columbia to Mike McKinley
Venezuela to Larry Palmer.
Next year, few big posts are up. Indeed the only posts are:
Cuba, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, panama, paraguay"
4600,"65 for and 356 against
(60 Dems and 5 Republicans voting for)
This is an increase of 9 votes since the last votes cast against the war (2009 war supp funding)."
4601,"Thnx for talking to Wendell. Will do. Spoke to Tim already via email and he getting me paper and then we can discuss.
Also told him to have Wendell go to the Expo opening. Altho delayed could also have an impact."
4603,"Fyi traffic
Mills, Cheryl D
Monday, April
FW: Sanctions
<MillsCD©state.gov>
19, 2010 4:20 PM
and Transitions"
4604,"The way you did the ending was pitch perfect. The headlines may about the Iran language, but you laid a powerful
predicate for moving forward. AM"
4605,"request for Haiti, Lugar says
FYI"
4606,###
4608,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, April 18, 2010 6:21 PM
Re: Tomorrow
latest is that nato will make decision tomorrow morning, they don't want to cancel unless they have to and unless we
have other dates to offer. We talked about around poland in July for the alternative.
Phil and I are connecting early tomorrow.
My guess is it will be moved."
4611,"Cloture was invoked on Lael Brainard's nomination this afternoon, 84-10.
Miguel E. Rodriguez
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Senate Affairs
Bureau of Legislative Affairs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2645
rodriguezme@state.gov"
4612,Fyi. This resolves - in some respects - the UN mandate issue Lavrov raised.
4613,"Yes sorry.
Here is what he said:"
4614,"This is the latest, believe it or not."
4615,"Update on airport openings. Looks like estonia is partially open. They think most ministers will fly private so they seem to
want to try and move forward."
4616,"Yes, joint w/WJC, Huma should have for your review"
4617,"Whew once again u are in the thick of thing--- but didn't it make your heart feel good about the passage of. Health.
Care----and. The. Nuns pushed it over the finish line---as usual in the fcore front of. Social. Justice and a daring
willingness. To break with the. Boys------ if you need a tonic. Go to the. Nuns exhibit @ the. Smithsonian--- Ripley.
Center. Gives the 250 year history of. Nuns in. Usa. And their role in shaping. Our country and producing 1000s of
women leaders with names like. Pelosi. Mikulski. Ferrar0. Sebilius. takes less than a hour. You are doing great
Sent from my BlackBerry Wireless Handheld"
4618,Lael was confirmed....79 to 19.
4619,"Lael Brainard was confirmed 78-19 this afternoon.
Miguel E. Rodriguez
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Senate Affairs
Bureau of Legislative Affairs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2645
rodriguezme@state.gov"
4620,"ahead.
Scheduled for 3:00 PM."
4621,"I had a good visit with her. She very much wants you to come to Egypt for the major anti-trafficking event she is doing in
December and sends you her regards.
Egypt is making good progress on women's issues: prosecuting child marriage cases, combating FGM and they're close to
passing a tough anti-trafficking law. Mrs M is the guiding force.
She and the President appreciated your call after his surgery. The most difficult part of our conversation was
We also announced our partnership with egypt for the training of. Afghan midwives at the suzanne mubarek health
center in Alexandria."
4622,"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Thursday, March 11, 2010 10:12 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
AMS
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
4623,Great! Will do.
4625,"Of Former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto .pdf
pi
As you will note from Larry's message below, we are dealing with a another ""situation' in Islamabad. I have asked Larry
to work with his team to be sure our response gets as broad coverage as possible in Pakistan and on-line so our reaction
is picked up by googlers. As you know, although our immediate reaction may be to just blow this stuff off we ignore it at
our peril since it seems there are large segments of the population who actually believe this stuff. I also want to be sure
we get it out to the diaspora community here and elsewhere. Thoughts ?
jrn"
4626,Example of our hitting back in action -- it works.
4627,great
4628,"I have sent Pi an email about this and will let you know what he thinks. I'm want to be sure we hit the Pakistani disapora
here and elsewhere."
4629,"Setup for foreign policy TV debate on Thursday. Obviously, this is a popular position. Clegg is now at the height of his
popularity and playing to public opinion. Clegg is pushing off both Brown (still suffering from Obama's dismissive slights,
unpopularity of Afghanistan, and, deepest factor, Bush poisoning of the well) and Cameron (making him an old
Thatcherite, pro-US, anti-EU). Clegg is an ardent Europeanist, not so much Americanist.
http://itn.co.uk/b0929495306b2635ca77854b1db33626.html
Clegg: special relationship with US is over
Tue Apr 20 2010 20:38:43
ctThe ""special relationship"" between Britain and the United States is over, Nick Clegg has said.
The Liberal Democrat leader said Barack Obama's administration ""understood the world had changed"" and the UK's
leaders needed to end their ""slavish"" devotion to Washington.
Mr Clegg also warned against ""sabre-rattling"" over Iran's nuclear ambitions and repeated his pledge to offer a referendum
on the UK's continued membership of the European Union when the issue next arose.
The Lib Dems have ruled out replacing Trident with a like-for-like system and Mr Clegg said the UK should consider ""not
having a continuous at sea deterrent"".
In a speech to the Foreign Press Association in London, Mr Clegg said it was time to challenge the ""conventional wisdom""
that had lasted since the Suez crisis about the UK's relationship with the US.
He said: ""I think it's sometimes rather embarrassing the way Conservative and Labour politicians talk in this kind of slavish
way about the special relationship. If you speak to hard-nosed folk in Washington they think 'it's a good relationship but it's
not the special relationship'."""
4630,"Napolitano and Secretary of State Clinton
fyi"
4632,"I know that Jack gave you a verbal summary, but here is the blow by blow. Not a wonderful meeting. To me the biggest
issue concerns the role of the NSC versus State/USAID in coordinating development policy. I will send some thoughts on
a possible strategy tomorrow. Jake, Cheryl and Jack have all seen this summary and Jack has approved it. AM"
4634,Permit me an unsolicited observation on the Bosnia issue.
4637,More.
4638,"Lissa and I met at the end of last week.
She had worked through a number of candidates.
She had narrowed to 3: (but see below); ; and She was continuing her B6
outreach.
Her email below is the latest update.
She has agreed not to depart even on 1 June if we have not yet settled and brought someone on board but I think we
are on track to do interviews the next two weeks and then give sample writings and opportunities to decide in sufficient
time.
Her update below is fyi to you."
4639,"Hillary and Cheryl,
I'm feeling very good about our recent efforts to connect our speeches thematically. We've done it with development,
human rights, and Internet freedom; and most recently with AIPAC, Ctr for Middle East Peace, and next the AJC. Here's
what I want to suggest: The three most basic elements of human existence are food, water, and health. We have now
done major speeches on food and water. I'd like us to consider a major speech on global health — the third in a
trilogy. Linking these three issues thematically, we can explain how and why foreign policy challenges and solutions
must be seen through a prism of human survival and why the conditions of people's lives influence everything from
economic development to political stability and more. This trilogy of speeches (with the right PR) could further
underscore our elevation of development AND our comprehensive, smart power approach to foreign policy. After
all, food, water, and health are the sine qua non of human progress. And this is a Hillary Clinton signature idea, at least
to me. Thoughts?
LM"
4640,"Sheepishly inquired as to whether you might be willing to speak at Madeira's commencement on June 4th in the
morning. It's her last time officiating as head of the school. It's a couple of days before the Lat Am trip. Thoughts?"
4641,"I like this idea.
I like even better that we have a nutrition speech coming up which bridges GNI and GHFSI and we could use it as a venue
not only to check the box re: FS, but health.
cdm"
4642,"You are the world's best boss!
AM"
4643,I'll find out about the date and whether they could move it.
4644,"Great! We will start working on how to connect these issues thematically, beginning with CARE speech. Maybe can
weave water in there as well to underscore our point."
4645,"FYI
Kristof's OpEd From Today's NY Times.
April 22, 2010
Op-Ed Columnist
Obama Backs Down on Sudan
By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF
JUBA, Sudan
Until he reached the White House, Barack Obama repeatedly insisted that the United States apply more pressure on
Sudan so as to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe in Darfur and elsewhere.
Yet, as president, Mr. Obama and his aides have caved, leaving Sudan gloating at American weakness. Western
monitors, Sudanese journalists and local civil society groups have all found this month's Sudanese elections to be deeply
flawed - yet Mr. Obama's special envoy for Sudan, Maj. Gen. Scott Gration, pre-emptively defended the elections, saying
they would be ""as free and as fair as possible."" The White House showed only a hint more backbone with a hurried
reference this week to ""an essential step"" with ""serious irregularities.""
President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan - the man wanted by the International Criminal Court for crimes against
humanity in Darfur - has been celebrating. His regime calls itself the National Congress Party, or N.C.P., and he was
quoted in Sudan as telling a rally in the Blue Nile region: ""Even America is becoming an N.C.P. member. No one is against
our will.""
Memo to Mr. Obama: When a man who has been charged with crimes against humanity tells the world that America is
in his pocket, it's time to review your policy.
Perhaps the Obama administration caved because it considers a flawed election better than no election. That's a
reasonable view, one I share. It's conceivable that Mr. Bashir could have won a quasi-fair election - oil revenues have
manifestly raised the standard of living in parts of Sudan - and the campaigning did create space for sharp criticism of
the government.
It's also true that Sudan has been behaving better in some respects.
The death toll in Darfur is hugely reduced, and the government is negotiating with rebel groups there. The Sudanese
government gave me a visa and travel permits to Darfur, allowing me to travel legally and freely.
The real game isn't, in fact, Darfur or the elections but the maneuvering for a possible new civil war. The last north-south
civil war in Sudan ended with a fragile peace in 2005, after some two million deaths. The peace agreement provided for
a referendum, scheduled to take place in January, in which southern Sudanese will decide whether to secede. They are
expected to vote overwhelmingly to form a separate country.
Then the question becomes: will the north allow South Sudan to separate? The south holds the great majority of the
country's oil, and it's difficult to see President Bashir allowing oil fields to walk away.
""If the result of the referendum is independence, there is going to be war - complete war,"" predicts Mudawi Ibrahim
Adam, one of Sudan's most outspoken human rights advocates. He cautions that America's willingness to turn a blind
eye to election-rigging here increases the risk that Mr. Bashir will feel that he can get away with war.
""They're very naïve in Washington,"" Mr. Mudawi said. ""They don't understand what is going on.""
On the other hand, a senior Sudanese government official, Ghazi Salahuddin, told me unequivocally in Khartoum, the
nation's capital, that Sudan will honor the referendum results. And it's certainly plausible that north and south will
muddle through and avoid war, for both sides are exhausted by years of fighting.
Here in Juba, the South Sudan capital, I met Winnie Wol, 26, who fled the civil war in 1994 after a militia from the north
attacked her village to kill, loot, rape and burn. Her father and many relatives were killed, but she escaped and made her
way to Kenya - and eventually resettled as a refugee in California. She now lives in Olathe, Kan., and she had returned
for the first time to Sudan to visit a mother and sisters she had last seen when she was a little girl.
Ms. Wol, every bit the well-dressed American, let me tag along for her journey back to her village of Nyamlell, 400 miles
northwest of Juba.
The trip ended by a thatch-roof hut that belonged to her mother, who didn't know she was coming - so no one was
home. Ms. Wol was crushed.
Then there was a scream and a woman came running. It was Ms. Wol's mother, somehow recognizing her, and they flew
into each other's arms.
To me, it felt like a peace dividend.
Yet that peace is fragile, and Ms. Wol knows that the northern forces may come back to pillage again. ""I don't want
war,"" she said, ""but I don't think they will allow us to separate.""
My own hunch is that the north hasn't entirely decided what to do, and that strong international pressure can reduce
the risk of another savage war. If President Obama is ever going to find his voice on Sudan, it had better be soon."
4646,"Pis print for HRC to read this weekend.
She can sign here on Monday and we can scan to them.
Happy to discuss with her.
cdm"
4647,fyi
4648,"FYI. Israelis spinning up a storm, starting with plane briefing on the way over."
4649,Ok
4650,"sbwhoeop
Tuesday, March 23, 2010 9:04 AM
H: New polls on US Jewish opinion, etc. Sid
hrc memo new polls 032310.docx
March 23, 2010
For: Hillary"
4652,"sbwhoeop
Tuesday, March 23, 2010 9:36 AM
PVerveer
fyi, drug violence, cuidad juarez and women. Sid
FYI, a lot of the violence in Cuidad Juarez has historically been targeted against women. In 2002, Max wrote this report
from Juarez, the first report by an American from the scene, winning the Annenberg Online Journalism Award, the
equivalent of the Pulitzer Prize.
• &It:script language=""JavaScript"" type=""text/javascript""&gt; document.write('&Ita
href=""http://clk.atdmt.com/CNT/go/197071989/directwi.728;hi.90/01/"" target="" blank""&gtAltimg
src=""http://view.atdmt.com/CNT/view/197071989/direct;wi.728;hi.90/01/""/&gt;&it
;/a&gt;'); &It:/script&gt;&lt;noscript&gt;&Ita
href=""http://clk.atdmt.com/CNT/go/197071989/direct;wi.728;hi.90/01/"" target="" blank""&gtAltimg border=""0""
src=""http://view.atdmt.com/CNTIview/197071989/direct;wi.728;hi.90/01/"" /&gt;El
tia&gt;&lt:/noscript&gt;
http://www.salon.com/news/feature/2002/12/04/juarez/print.html
Day of the dead
More than 325 women have been murdered in the free-trade boomtown of Ciudad Juarez in the past decade. Faced with
government incompetence and corruption, people are rebelling.
By Max Blumenthal
Dec 4, 2002 I The body of another murdered woman was found late last month in the Mexican industrial hub of Ciudad
Juarez, dumped behind some shrubs in the squalor of the Anapra neighborhood, a ramshackle hodgepodge of corrugated
tin and cardboard shacks on the sludge-washed banks of the Rio Grande. Her hands had been tied, and the evidence
suggested she had been raped. The body was so badly decomposed that investigators calculated that she'd been dead
for seven months.
However horrific the details, they were numbing in their familiarity. The body of a woman who had died in similar
circumstances was found in the same dusty lot a couple of months earlier. The bodies of eight women were found in a lot
not far away a little more than a year ago. So many women have been murdered here in the past 10 years that there is no
reliable count. Most experts place it close to 325, an average of 32 a year, nearly three every month. At least 90 of the
deaths are believed to be the work of one or more serial killers. Hundreds more women have simply vanished.
Like so many of the others, the woman whose body was found in late October had probably come to Juarez from the
poverty of southern Mexico to work for about $10 a day in one of the many foreign-owned assembly plants known as
maquiladoras that sprouted up in Juarez after the North American Free Trade Agreement was signed in 1994. And like
them, too, her body was unclaimed in death and buried alone and anonymous.
Such death has become a way of life here. So, too, with the fear and paranoia that rise in such a climate. Nobody knows
who is doing the killings, and the mystery only seems to deepen. Arrests made by local authorities have produced
allegations of torture, witness tampering and frame-ups -- but no convictions. Most here believe that the killer or killers
must have enormous clout. Perhaps, some say, the killers are narcotrafficantes disposing of witnesses. Perhaps they are
the sons of the wealthy and powerful indulging in sick sex. Perhaps they are cultists whose members come from the
highest levels of government and finance. The theories differ, but a common assumption is that arrests made thus far are
only a smokescreen for an historically opaque and corrupt government that will protect its dark secrets at any cost.
One thing seems clear: The murders arise from a social landscape that has been transformed by global economic forces.
Where Ciudad Juarez was once a small, sleepy desert outpost just across the border from El Paso, Texas, the population
in the past decade has exploded to 1.2 million people, many of them drawn by the lure of the maquiladoras. The tides of
people have overwhelmed the ability of the city to absorb them, overwhelmed health services, social services and law
enforcement. Free-trade advocates once promised that NAFTA would transform Juarez into the City of the Future -- and
they have been proven right in a way they never could have imagined. Today, Juarez still has the feel of the lawless Old
West, but with a grim 21st century edge.
Despite promises of swift justice from Mexican President Vicente Fox and Chihuahua Gov. Patricio Martinez, they have
yet to take up offers of assistance from the FBI; bureau agents in Texas have suggested that official corruption is
hindering efforts to stop the murders. Chihuahua state investigators have seemingly adopted a ""don't ask, don't tell"" policy
towards Juarez's homicides, fostering an atmosphere of impunity and pervasive fear. Foreign corporations operating in
Juarez that have employed many of the murdered women largely deny that such an atmosphere exists.
But in this postmodern urban culture, where the very concept of community has broken down, many bereaved family
members and local activists have begun to take matters into their own hands, investigating the murders and speaking out
even if it means threats and other reprisals.
Evangeline Arce's daughter, Silvia, a street vendor, disappeared on Nov. 3, 1998. Since that day, she said, the authorities
have done little to investigate. ""Two days after my daughter disappeared, I went to the police and filed a report,"" the
mother says in Spanish, her face flaring with anger. ""They promised me prompt action but when I checked back a week
later, the Missing persons report was never filed and the investigation had not even begun. When they finally got
witnesses together, none of them would talk because they were too afraid.""
Even as Mexico continues to make strides toward becoming an open and democratic society, the epidemic of rape and
murder here has exposed the heavy residue of its corrupt and authoritarian political legacy as well as the contradictions of
its efforts at economic expansion.
To understand the magnitude of the breakdown, think of the sniper rampage in the Washington area this fall that left 10
people dead and three wounded. Imagine that Montgomery County Police Chief Charles Moose held a press conference
and asked local citizens to catch the sniper themselves because local police were not up to the task and the federal
government was not being helpful; imagine that the federal government charged that local officials in Montgomery County
were complicit in the killings and impeding the investigation. Chaos would ensue, certainly. But then, multiply. the number
of victims by 30, by 40, by 50, or more.
That's Juarez today.
The jumbled, exhaust-choked commercial core of this city has grown wildly in the wake of NAFTA, adding modern
shopping malls, condominiums and expansive boulevards. The population is growing at twice the rate of the national
average; it is expected to nearly double by 2010, to 2 million people. Many of them directly or indirectly rely on the 300 or
so maquiladoras for their livelihoods.
To accommodate the new army of workers, the city has given birth to entirely new sectors. The Campestre Juarez is a
luxurious conglomerate of gated communities, with a main gate that's a life-size replica of Paris' Arc de Triomphe. Nearby,
many of the maquiladoras are situated along the Avenida de la Industria. Though the assembly-line workers sometimes
can be glimpsed behind a plate glass window in aqua-blue uniforms, there usually is little sign of any activity behind the
maquiladoras' featureless walls.
Most of the new residents are poor, or on the brink of poverty, and they live in Anapra or another of the grim, violent
colonias populares on the outskirts of town. In those colonies, residents usually live without sanitation, running water,
electricity or paved roads.
Avenida Manuel Gomez Morin is the pothole-riddled six-lane avenue that ties these varied worlds together. Sitio Colosio
Valle, a medium-sized strip mall, stands on a corner of the avenue at the gateway to the industrial sector. It is fronted by a
vast parking lot and inside are various clothing outlets and boutiques. By day, the lot bustles as customers scurry back
and forth, hauling their purchases to their cars -- a sight similar to any mall in the suburban United States. By night,
however, traffic tapers off, stores lock up and the mall's lot becomes dark and desolate. Sitio Colosio Valle was where
many of the slain and missing women were last seen.
In the mall's parking lot, Braulio Rosas, a 40-year-old security guard, leans against the door of a giant Nike outlet. Inside
the store, under bright fluorescent lights, employees frantically check inventory and scramble to close up.
""A lot of girls were picked up here,"" Roses says in a voice of calm resignation. ""But really, it's the girls' fault. It's because
even though they weren't putas, [prostitutes] you know, they were more like fad/es [easy women]. They didn't have to get
into those cars if they didn't want to.""
Rosas sounds cynical, but blaming the victims is by no means an aberration in Juarez. Similar notions have been offered
by officials like Suly Ponce, the former Chihuahua special prosecutor in charge of the murdered women's cases.
""Sometimes there are cases that a girl meets some person, he strikes up a relationship with her, they drink ... and it ends
violently,"" she told the Washington Post in 2000, before she was promoted to a job in the governor's office. ""It's difficult to
know.""
A handful of the women found murdered since 1993 were indeed confirmed as prostitutes. But the truth is that a large
majority of the missing or murdered women were hardworking, young, poor and for the most part socially conservative.
Most had migrated to Juarez from Mexico's depressed south to work in the maquiladoras, sometimes arriving alone and
with little means of contacting their families back home.
The maquiladoras, run by companies like Delphi and RCA Thomson, prefer to hire young women for assembly-line jobs.
An entry-level assembly-line worker makes minimum wage, about $2 an hour. With experience, pay can rise to as much
as $2,50 an hour -- and compared to wages in Guerrero or Chiapas, that's good money. But in Juarez, the women are
caught in an economic trap: Since the cost of living here is only slighter lower than in El Paso, the wages that seem so
high to new maquiladora workers actually ensure poverty. The workers can be hired and fired on the spot, with little
pretext and no legal protection. And union activities are prohibited.
Even for those who accept the conditions, security is elusive. More often now, the global companies that own
maquiladoras are closing up shop and transferring operations to China to take advantage of lower taxes, investment
subsidies and outrageously cheap labor. On June 29, Royal Philips Electronics announced it was moving its P.C. monitor
manufacturing operations, at a cost of 900 jobs. On July 1, Scientific Atlanta fired 1,300 workers after shutting its plant
down. According to the Nov. 5 New York Times, this trend has cost Juarez 287,000 jobs in the maquiladoras since their
peak in October 2000.
Not only does this slash and burn the economic base. There are brutal social reverberations, too. The city's health
system, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, has reported 200,000 people falling from its list of insured after losing their
company policies, according to a July article in La Prensa. Esther Chavez Cano, director of Juarez's only battered-
women's shelter, Casa Amiga, said in a speech this summer that domestic violence cases had risen by 50 percent in July
alone.
The combination of poverty and a lack of social connections renders women on the assembly line powerless and virtually
invisible. And that has made them easy prey. According to the El Paso Times, about a third of the approximately 325 slain
women were employed by maquiladoras at the time of their murder.
Given that few of the maquiladoras provide shuttle service to and from the colonies, the female workers often are preyed
upon while walking through perilous places like Sitio Colosio Valle in the darkness of the early morning. At such an hour,
the only nearby activity is that of bars and nightclubs closing up as male patrons filter into the street after a long night of
drinking.
Besides China's attractive economic climate, an intangible cause of maquiladora flight is Juarez's chronic violence. The
effect is difficult to measure. Two companies in the city's industrial sector -- including TDK, the audio tape maker -- have
posted banners on their factories reading: ""STOP THE VIOLENCE. To Better Our City, Let's Unite."" But most foreign
companies are purely economic organisms governed entirely, it seems, by the dictates of efficiency. They have
maintained a stunning silence even as their female workers are slaughtered.
Consider the case of 17-year-old Claudia !vette Gonzalez. Her body was found in November 2001 along with seven
others in an overgrown cotton field on Avenida Technologico, just blocks from Sitio Colosio Valle mall and across the
street from the offices of the Association of Maquiladoras. She had worked on the assembly line for the Lear Corp., a
Detroit-based auto-interior supplier. Lear has declined to publicly address Gonzalez's murder.
Greg Bloom, editor of the Frontera Norte Sur -- an Internet news service that focuses on the U.S.-Mexico border --
recalled a conversation with Gonzalez's mother, Josefina, in which she recounted her daughter's last day. In the darkness
of the early morning, Gonzalez told him, Claudia set out for her job at Lear. When she arrived at work a few minutes late
after missing her bus, Claudia lvette was promptly sent away under a policy barring tardy assembly-line workers from their
shifts. A half-hour past when she usually would have returned home, her mother knew something was gravely wrong. Her
worst fear -- the same nagging fear shared by so many Juarez mothers -- would soon be realized.
Andrea Puchalsky, Lear's director of communications, acknowledged that the company has not made any public
statements regarding Gonzalez's murder, nor has it enacted any proactive measures to protect employees from another
wave of violence. ""Adding security is not a question that relates to Lear,"" she said. ""[Gonzalez's murder] did not happen
on Lear property.""
When questioned about the murder and Lear policies, Puchalsky mentioned that a company memo was prepared for her
with responses to possible questions. As to Lear's worker-lockout policy, which apparently put Gonzalez in a precarious
situation the day of her abduction, Puchalsky declined to comment on whether Gonzalez was locked out or sent home
from Lear's plant on her last day.
""We have a policy for tardiness and she was tardy many times,"" Puchalsky said. ""When she had arrived late to work her
shift, she was not there in time to work her shift.""
When asked whether Lear's offices in the U.S. have a similar policy in which late employees are barred from working their
shifts, Puchalsky reversed her earlier statement, vehemently denying that such a policy existed anywhere within Lear's
operations. ""There is not a policy to send a worker home after X number of tardy arrivals,"" she said. ""Typically what we do
is if there is someone arriving late on kind of a warning system, there might be a notification that 'the next time you arrive
late, you have to take a day off ...' It's not a policy, though. There is no written policy like that throughout Lear Corp.""
The body of 17-year-old Lilia Alejandra Garcia was found mutilated just 300 feet from her maquiladora in February 2001,
and since then her case has come to embody the incompetence and corruption of police and prosecutors from Ciudad
Juarez to the state capital in Chihuahua City and south all the way to Mexico City.
Garcia, the mother of a 5-month-old baby and a 2-year-old child, apparently was kidnapped just after she left work. She
was held in captivity for a week, repeatedly beaten and raped, and then strangled. Then-prosecutor Suly Ponce told the
Juarez newspaper El Diario that Garcia was the first woman of the year to be murdered and raped in this area of the city -
- even though two days before, the body of an unidentified woman was found naked just blocks away.
When an FBI leak revealed witness testimony linking Lilia Garcia's killers to drug dealers, Suly Ponce dismissed it, calling
it erroneous. She instead blamed workers in a circus across the street from the strip mall where Garcia was last seen.
When circus managers claimed that Ponce offered them money to blame co-workers, she dropped the investigation.
According to a July article in the El Paso Times, former Chihuahua state forensic chief Oscar Maynez Grijalva said Garcia
was killed in a similar manner as three of the eight women found in the cotton field with Claudia 'vette Gonzalez in
November 2001. Curiously, local authorities behaved just as evasively in that investigation as in Garcia's.
When Gonzalez and the seven other women's bodies were found in November 2001, ex-Chihuahua Attorney General
Arturo Gonzalez Rascon immediately fingered two local bus drivers as the culprits. Yet doubts about their guilt arose,
especially after Grijalva -- who was Rascon's evidence expert at the time -- resigned from his post, citing pressure to
fabricate evidence against them. And the head of a local prison was forced from office when he documented signs of
torture on the accused men after they had returned from Rascon's office.
Four months later, in February 2002, a search-and-rescue team combing the cotton field found Claudia lvette Gonzalez's
overalls in a plastic bag, along with strands of hair and other crucial pieces of evidence that Rascon's investigators had
failed to discover. In response, Rascon offered his opinion to the El Paso Times: ""The state police have done a thoroughly
professional job. I have no doubt about that."" But on Oct. 28, DNA results revealed that Rascon's investigators had
properly identified only one of the eight dead women -- Gonzalez.
Stuck with a far more dubious task than catching one madman or replacing one feeble leader, Juarez's fractured civil
society has been paralyzed. A cynical mood is palpable just by speaking to citizens on the street, who unanimously
express fear and distrust of law-enforcement and government officials. Some local cops are just as cynical.
""We can't just sit around in deserted places waiting for someone to drive up and dump bodies off,"" said one municipal
police officer seated in an idling paddy wagon who refused to give his name for security reasons. ""There are too few of us
and the city's too big ... We don't get much support from the federal government. Judicially, we are not protected like cops
in the U.S. Plus, the arms they give us are weak and the bulletproof vests don't really stop bullets. It's not just that,
though. I have a young woman in my home so I can put myself in the place of the parents who have lost their daughters.
But it's a question of society. We need their support and they need them to be more conscious if it is going to get any
better here.""
The scope of the crime is so enormous, and there has been so little success in stopping it, that suspicion breeds on itself.
The litany of theories as to who the killers are and what their motive might be suggests that Juarez has become a
breeding ground for every imaginable predator. And yet, nobody knows. Nothing is certain. And that feeds the climate of
paranoia.
Garcia and Gonzalez's murders are rumored to be the work of a serial killer with possible ties to drug dealers. Yet Garcia
was found with marks on her wrists that, according to local forensics experts, were identical to those made by police
handcuffs. And upon the discovery of her daughter's overalls, Josefina Gonzalez told the El Paso Times that someone
powerful was undoubtedly responsible for the murder.
Many in Mexico's law enforcement community agree that a ring of rich men are behind some of the killings, but they have
no evidence to support the theory. Some suggest that some young men from the local aristocracy are responsible, but are
being protected by their parents. A persistent theory holds that the murders -- or a significant subset of them -- are linked
to powerful narcotraficantes who have co-opted segments of the local ruling class.
And the cynicism has been exacerbated by the fact that of the 17 men and one woman accused as serial killer
masterminds of the murders, only one has been convicted, Abdel Latif Sharif Sharif, an Egyptian chemist and resident of
Texas at the time of his extradition to Mexico in 1995. Currently, Sharif is awaiting sentencing for allegedly paying a drug
trafficker named Victor Manuel Rivera Moreno to carry out about a dozen murders. However, evidence against Sharif is
suspect and charges against him have been changed repeatedly. Once he was even charged with killing a woman,
Elizabeth Ontiveros, who showed up later at police offices to prove she was alive.
In 1996, Sharif was accused of paying the gang Los Rebeldes to kill 17 women. Then, in 1999, he was charged with hiring
five bus drivers and an El Paso man from his jail cell to kill seven women. Officials claimed Sharif hired the killers to
deflect blame from himself. By 1999, judges had cleared him of all charges, citing an absence of concrete evidence and
the possibility of witness intimidation by prosecutors.
Suly Ponce, who supervised the case, has yet to make a compelling case against him. In a 1999 radio interview, rather
than presenting hard evidence, she claimed Sharif was aggressively hostile toward women because of his Egyptian
background. Now she says that the case against Sharif hinges on Moreno's declaration that Sharif paid him to carry out
the killings with money he earned from 13 patents he developed for Benchmark Research and Technology. But according
to an article in the El Paso Times, Benchmark has never paid employees for patent development. In a telephone interview
last week with Salon, Ponce said she hadn't known this. Angela Paiaveras, the current special prosecutor, declined to
discuss Sharif's case or any aspect of the investigations.
Many local residents scoff at the notion that the killers have been caught. ""We don't believe that the guys they have
arrested are the killers,"" says Miguel Angel Jaramillo, a mid-level manager for the Lear Corp. ""It's obvious that they're just
scapegoats.""
Yet Ponce remains ardent in her belief that Sharif is at the center of the murders. ""Today the killings continue because
there are many imitators,"" she told Salon last week. ""But after Sharif was caught, there were almost no homicides for a
year."" But according to the Juarez daily El Diario, the year immediately after Sharif was jailed -- a period spanning from
October 1995 to October 1996 -- 28 young women were found murdered.
Meanwhile, the theories flourish and become more and more paranoid, reflecting a breakdown in public trust. By one
popular theory, the women are being murdered at blood rituals for a cabal of wealthy, powerful men. Another theory posits
a financial motive for murder. ""We're finding a lot of girls that are mutilated in the same way,"" says a young municipal
police officer who declined to give his name. ""Someone's probably killing them to take their organs to sell them for a lot of
money in the U.S."" When asked if there was any evidence to support the theory, the officer replied that it was only a
hunch.
Such a climate sends a message to the killers every day: You can get away with anything, even a crime on this scale. But
where such a climate breeds cynicism and hopelessness among people who live and work here, it has also provoked an
incipient revolt.
On her radio show ""Grueso Calibre"" (""Large Caliber""), popular host Samira lzaguirre frequently aired the views of guests
who were critical of how authorities handled the murders. When Attorney General Rascon accused the two bus drivers of
the cotton field murders in November 2001, lzaguirre hosted the drivers' wives on her show. After that interview,
advertisements began appearing in local newspapers smearing lzaguirre with claims that she frequented strip clubs and
was romantically involved with one of the bus drivers. News media on both sides of the border have reported that the
receipt for the ad was signed by government officials who paid for it.
Then, in February, when lzaguirre started organizing a vigil and announced a hunger strike on her show on Radio Canon,
she was fired. Fearing for her safety, she moved across the border to El Paso.
Others, too, have discovered that pressing the complaint too forcefully brings reprisal. Marisela Ortiz, co-director of
Nuestras Hijas Regreso a Casa (Our Daughters Back Home), a legal support group for victims' parents, was a frequent
guest on ""Grueso Calibre."" Like Izaguirre, Ortiz has focused her resources on drawing attention to government and police
incompetence in the slain women's cases. And she says that, like lzaguirre, she has faced ever-increasing danger.
In Nuestras Hijas' office in central Juarez, located inside a small one-story row house with a ""For Rent"" sign out front,
Ortiz described the shadow of terror that has stalked her since she began pressuring the authorities.
She claims she was threatened by ex-Chihuahua District Attorney Arturo Gonzalez Rascon. ""Rascon came all the way to
Juarez [from Chihuahua City] to tell me not to involve myself in all the cases,"" she tells Salon. ""Then I got a message on
my phone saying: 'You have daughters that are alive. Take care of them."" Rascon, in an earlier story by the Associated
Press, denied the allegation.
Last May, Ortiz says, she was pursued by men in a black pickup truck who tried to kidnap her. She believes the attempt
was orchestrated by Rascon's office since it occurred only a day before she had planned to travel to El Paso for a meeting
with the FBI and Texas state Sen. Eliot Shapleigh, D-El Paso, who is calling for a bi-national investigation into the
murders.
Victims' parents who came to Nuestras Hijas for help in finding their missing daughters also say they have been
threatened. Mario Lee Lopez and his wife, Soledad Aguilar, lost their daughter, Cecilia Covarrubias. She was kidnapped
in 1995 along with their granddaughter, who was two months old. By now their granddaughter would be 7, and Lopez and
Aguilar's own investigation has led them to believe that she is alive and living in the custody of a well-connected local
family.
To an outsider it is a desperate story, all but impossible to prove. Lopez accuses Ponce of coordinating the coverup of the
kidnappings and murder: again, Ponce denies the charge. And she was adamant that government officials have harassed
no one. ""I didn't have any knowledge of threats against anybody,"" she said. ""On the contrary, we support the families and
they are encouraged to be intimately involved in the investigations.""
Lopez recalls an incident in which he had gone to Juarez's judicial building to press his granddaughter's case and did not
exactly find the kind of support Ponce mentioned. While leaving the court, Lopez says, he was confronted by a high-
ranking minister who warned that if he didn't drop the investigation, he would be tortured with electric shock devices.
""But it's too late to stop now,"" Lopez adds with a wistful smile.
Despite the campaign against lzaguirre, or perhaps because of it, the vigil took place as scheduled in March. It was an
unprecedented show of solidarity, with thousands of people gathered in the cotton field where Gonzalez and the seven
others were found in an irrigation ditch. There are still tatters of yellow police tape there, and candleholders left from the
vigil are strewn over the site. Eight red crosses mark the spot where the bodies were found.
However, city officials have no plans to memorialize the site as Juarez's residents have. In fact, according to a Sept. 4
article in El Diario, the site is now being used as a dumping ground for Juarez's Department of Parks and Gardens.
Near downtown Juarez there is a monument to Abraham Lincoln, honoring him for ""establishing North American
industries, today the most important in the world."" Not far away is a simple gallery where the Collective Antigone [Antigone
Collective], a group of local artists, has organized a series of public performances, installations and conferences focused
on Juarez's crisis of violence.
Each week, the artists gather to collaborate and discuss strategy. At a table with 12 other artists and writers, in an
expansive room filled with cubist-inspired paintings, Antonio Munoz Ortega, a 51-year-old writer, describes the Collective's
goals and the problems confronting the group. ""Our government is authoritarian, and authoritarian governments are
principally concerned with the manipulation of life,"" he says. ""The victims' families feel manipulated by the authorities'
insensitivity and this has manifested a greater and greater cynicism here that's really dangerous. The struggle, then, is for
reparation and simply regaining our daily lives.""
Ortega says he was moved to action by Samira Izaguirre's candlelight vigil in March. He describes the building of an
impromptu church in front of the Association of Maquiladoras office as an effort to ""communicate through a different
language, one that's symbolic."" This decision, he says, helped lead to the formation of the Collective.
The rallying cry for Collectiva Antigona, as evidenced by the name, has been Sophocles Greek tragedy, ""Antigone,""
which tells the tale of a girl's persecution at the hands of a cruel dictator for burying her brother. The Collectiva has
organized readings of the play around the state of Chihuahua and plans a public performance in the future.
The Collectiva also has begun to establish a visual presence around central Juarez, most noticeably by painting a wall
spanning an entire block with poetry written by participants in a recent writer's conference on violence against women. On
Nov. 1 and 2, the Mexican holiday Dia de los Muertos, the collective filled a room with traditional altars honoring the
victims along with a giant cross in the center of the room covered with masks, intended to symbolize the anonymity of the
victims. An estimated 1,500 people viewed the exhibit. A week later, working with Nuestras Hijas, the collective placed a
coffin and flowers and had a bonfire in the cotton field ditch where Claudia Ivette Gonzalez and seven others were found.
""It is absolutely necessary to affect civil society with the intention of shaking the indolence and to provoke some sort of
reaction from the people,"" says Mariela Paniagua, a 41-year-old painter. ""People are no longer affected by what is
happening in this city. They have lost the capacity for outrage in the face of these acts.""
While Collectiva Antigona meets, another group gathers a few miles away to combat Juarez's violence by drastically
different means. Past the seemingly endless rows of cardboard hovels in the desperately poor CoIonia Morelos, beyond
the municipal dump, on a rocky desert mesa in the shadow of Mount Indio, members of a search-and-rescue group called
Banda Civil spread out through the hills to search for more murder victims.
Luz Elena Guerrero Guerra, a strong-looking woman in her late 50s with an intense gaze, serves as president of one of
Banda Civil's six divisions. Guerra tells of how it began as a search-and-rescue group in 1985 to assist during a massive
earthquake in Mexico City and evolved to respond to Juarez's crisis. She herself found the first slain women's bodies in
1989, before investigators had even identified the deadly trend. Today, Banda Civil's members still lend their help during
natural disasters but the bulk of their work comes in the search for bodies, monitoring of schools and a citywide crime-
awareness campaign.
Ever-present terror, coupled with the impotence of Juarez's authorities, forced Banda Civil's transformation, Guerra says.
""I've narrowly escaped violence many times,"" she explains. ""Sometimes it is just pure luck that a bus or a taxi happens to
come by in time when someone is chasing me ... All of us, we're uncertain of what the authorities are telling us. That's our
indignation. If they [the authorities] aren't interested in helping, we'll pressure them.""
Because the group is required by law to cooperate with police, some view it with suspicion. Yet they have had success
where most other activist groups have failed. It was Banda Civil members who made the crucial discovery of Claudia
lvette Gonzalez's overalls in February, humiliating Attorney General Rascon and breathing new life into the investigation.
And Banda Civil has continued to find more evidence during their weekly searches of Juarez's human dumping grounds.
Besides its role as a search-and-rescue/quasi-vigilante group, Banda Civil has the feel of a support group, providing
members with an outlet from the daily fear that comes with life in Juarez. According to Guerra, over 300 people have
accompanied the group on searches and many of them are family members of missing women. And indeed, the searches
are a family activity.
On one recent Saturday, the search was joined by about 60 participants of all ages and from all sectors of Juarez society,
including a middle manager from the Lear Corp. There were no terrible discoveries that day, and yet afterward, as people
stood around talked and listened to norteno music blaring from a car stereo, it was evident just how deeply the murders
are ingrained into life here -- and how some people are fighting back with whatever tools they have at hand. Perhaps the
quiet optimism is derived from the age-old Mexican axiom that death brings about rebirth.
""Instead of spending our time criticizing the authorities, we're trying to find some solutions,"" says Santos. ""We all have
sisters and daughters here and we all feel the same. My daughter is in danger. I can't let her live like this.""
-- By Max Blumenthal
[3(
Copyright © 2010 Salon Media Group, Inc. Reproduction of material from any Salon pages without written permission is
strictly prohibited. SALON® is registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office as a trademark of Salon Media Group
Inc."
4653,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, April 22, 2010 6:09 PM
H; Mills, Cheryl D
Re: To Cheryl Mills: Rep. McGovern Letter to President Obama, DHS Secretary
Napolitano and Secretary of State Clinton
Craig and I have discussed the state sponsor of terror issue a couple of times
Let me follow up with him."
4654,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, May 1, 2010 12:05 PM
Update from ops
Subject: (SBU) Amcit detained for explosives threat on flight from Taipei to Shanghai • During China Airlines flight
501, Amcit told cabin crew his luggage contained explosives.
The plane was diverted to Hangzhou, wherenvas detained by Chinese authorities. Authorities found no
explosives on the flight, and the plane continued to Shanghai. • According to the Taiwan National Immigration
Agencyjattempted to board with U.S. passport number However, because he did not have a valid
Chinese visa,flflew on his Taiwanese passport."
4655,"RELEASE IN PART
B6
fyi"
4656,Fyi
4657,"I think it's Dec 10 at the Winter Palace in Luxor where you previously staved I'll eet exact date
The. Assembly passed a
good anti-trafficking law a day ago because of her leadership. I think it's a first for the region.
I saw the FM today. He said, ""Tell dear Hillary that I send hugs.""
I'm heading home finally. Its been intensive but very good. They love you here."
4658,Fyi. Good news!
4659,"sbwhoeop
Friday, April 23, 2010 10:06 AM
h: just a line. S
Next time you feel like stepping all over your story by saying you are tired, use the line of the black woman in the
Montgomery bus boycott who walked to work: ""My feet is tired, but my soul is rested.""
On UK: Clegg held his own in the second debate last night. Gordon hit him as ""anti-American."" This feels like it's moving
to a hung parliament. Cameron can't break through. Two-thirds of the voters simply hate the Tories. No matter how well
Clegg does the system doesn't allow for any gain in seats to match his personal poll numbers. UK stunned by its first
series of debates and the whole campaign has atrophied in wonderment, little happening between the debates. Final one
next week, but guaranteed not to be conclusive, just a repetition, confirming the earlier two.
Sid"
4660,"Great - I have to brief her tomorrow on Haiti - I will tell her we are re-looking at it.
cdm"
4661,"sbwhoeop
Friday, April 23, 2010 10:11 AM
FYI Kornblum... Sid
In light of Clegg's rising popularity partly based on his anti-Americanism and Germany's growing hegemony in Europe
while becoming more insular, John Kornblum has written this op-ed with reference in last graphs to US policy.
7.71
April 23, 2010
I.H.T. Op-Ed Contributor
Germany in Need of a Dream
By JOHN KORNBLUM
Has Germany abandoned Europe? Do Angela Merkel's tough conditions for aid to Greece mean that Germany is no
longer the motor of European integration? Has Frau Merkel in fact morphed from the Miss Europa of 2007 to the Fraulein
Germania of 2010, as Germany's own former foreign minister Joschka Fischer has suggested?
As a former American ambassador who has lived arid worked the better part of four decades around Germany, my
Blackberry often glows red hot with messages from persons asking these questions. My response is always the same:
Germany has changed very little, but Europe and the world have changed a lot. Therein lies the dilemma.
Germany has worked hard to dig its way out of the disaster of 1945, but trauma remains a defining issue for German
society. Sixty five years later, Germany is still focused on the three essentials of its recovery: stability, respectability and
peace. Keep this triangle in mind and lots of things quickly come into focus.
From the first days of the Federal Republic. Germany's leaders emphasized the importance of defining interests solely
within a common European and Atlantic vocation. But they also understood that renouncing national ambitions did not
remove the responsibility to pursue specific German goals through the common institutions.
Many important postwar accomplishments were conceived and pushed by Germany, sometimes over the opposition of
others — including the United States. Ostpolitik was controversial for years, as was NATO enlargement. Germany pushed
them with determination.
Helmut Kohl did not consult before promulgating his 10 points on reunification. He agreed to French desires for a common
currency, but only if it could be a mirror of the Deutsche mark, for decades the European monetary standard. The euro
stability pact, now the object of so much controversy with Greece, was the result. After 1990, the E.U.'s eastward
expansion was Germany's way of firming up its Eastern flank.
Slowly and without fanfare, Germany has been remaking the European Union in its image. At each step of the way,
Germany made its wishes more palatable by paying more than its share. Part of today's misunderstanding is caused by
Germany's success in using its contributions to build an image of selflessness. Germany has been as single-minded in
pursuit of its goals as Charles de Gaulle ever was for his, but it almost always left leadership to others.
A new consciousness grew after the costs of reunification began to mount. ""Europe"" in the institutional sense has become
increasingly unpopular. German courts have begun to define German European issues in the context of the German
Constitution rather than on the basis of E.U. law. At least some of Ms. Merkel's refusal to allow immediate assistance to
Greece was based on her fears that it would fan anti-E.U. sentiment at home. Are these the first signs of a German Tea
Party?
Here we find the source of most of the hand wringing about Germany's role as the ""motor of Europe."" Ms. Merkel's
unwillingness to sweeten the financial pot echoed throughout Brussels. To many, it signified the decline of German
willingness to ""salute the French flag three times before raising the German flag,"" as Konrad Adenauer used to put it.
Germans are not alone in objecting to throwing more money into the E.U. pot, but they happen to be the only ones who
can do something about it. Many fear that without German complaisance, the E.U. will stutter to a stop. But such self-
denial could never offer a viable foundation for a new Europe. Neither could the inefficiency and even corruption that
characterizes many E.U. programs.
Most maddening for most thinking Europeans is the knowledge that the Germans are right. But to them, the question is
whether Germany is remaking the E.U. in a fashion palatable to the majority of other member states. They are not so sure
that its focus on stability and accountability is the right way to help such a diverse collection of peoples adjust to a
globalized world.
And so when Angela Merkel raps Greek knuckles, she is sending a message most Europeans don't want to hear. Not that
Germany is dangerous; even worse, that it is unrelenting. The Neue aricher Zeitung probably spoke for many others
when it once accused Germany of wanting Europe to become a large Switzerland.
The growing gap between Germany's aspirations and the perceived needs of other members of the E.U. is beginning to
burden both sides. Most Europeans are simply not ready to live up to German standards. Without a more flexible sense of
common purpose, the project to build a democratic Europe could stop dead in the water. But as Germans will themselves
often tell you: They have forgotten how to dream.
Younger Germans feel this lack of inspiration as well. Dreams were what 200,000 of them were waiting to hear when they
rallied to hear Barack Obama in Berlin two summers ago. They wanted more than to ""Dare to Hope,"" which is the
characteristically timid German translation of the title of the president's best seller. And they are still waiting. America
seems busy elsewhere.
The main conclusion I draw from the debate about Germany is that it is not about Germany at all. The task of building a
democratic Europe is far from complete. Most of the foundations have been laid and now the residents are starting to
haggle over the design. Weaving today's 27 states into a true trans-Atlantic partnership is a task that is too big for
Germany or even Europe to accomplish alone. They desperately need some skilled architectural assistance.
Uniting Europe and North America is the most audacious project ever conceived. If it works, the United States will be
joined by nearly 500 million Europeans to form a democratic space, within which modern democratic values will harness
more energy than in any single nation on earth. Democracy's future as the operating system for a globalized world will be
assured.
European fecklessness seems to worry Washington officials these days. But if Germany has forgotten how to dream and
the United States is too busy to try, we will both be guilty of perpetuating the aimlessness we so criticize. To hold up its
side of the bargain, Europe needs exactly what Barack Obama originally promised — the audacity of hope.
John Kornblum, senior counselor with the international law firm Noerr LLP in Berlin, served as the U.S. ambassador to
Germany from 1997 to 2001."
4663,Arabs gave green light. More later.
4664,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 23, 2010 11:46 AM
H
Sullivan, Jacob J; Burns, William J
FW: Americans held in Iran"
4665,fyi
4666,"Can we put out the below?
Draft S Statement on the Hikers
I was pleased to learn of the consular visit yesterday by the Swiss Ambassador in Iran to the three detained American
hikers, Shane Bauer, Josh Fattal, and Sarah Shourd. But we are disturbed by the families' reports of their children's
physical and emotional health. These three Americans -- innocent tourists in Iraq's Kurdistan region when they were
detained on July 31, 2009 -- have been unjustly held for almost nine months without formal charges or access to legal
representation. We ask the Islamic Republic of Iran to release these three Americans and allow them to go home and be
reunited with their families.
###"
4667,We did. I sent this to you at Goose Bay.
4669,Sure thing. Will prepare a call sheet for you.
4670,"Below is the article I mentioned:
U.S. Revises Tack on Mideast Arms
Washington, Egypt Discuss Plan to Rid Region of Nuclear Weapons, in Effort to Steal Iran's Thunder at U.N. Conference
By JONATHAN WEISMAN, JAY SOLOMON and JOE LAURIA
The U.S. is negotiating with Egypt a proposal to make the Middle East a region free of nuclear weapons, as the U.S. seeks
to prevent Iran from derailing a monthlong U.N. conference on nuclear nonproliferation that begins Monday.
U.S. officials familiar with the move call it an important step in assuring countries that Washington—criticized by some
for its silence about Israel's undeclared nuclear arsenal—will equitably address weapons proliferation across the region, as
Iran seeks to shift focus away from its own nuclear program.
Washington also reassured Israel it won't foist a nuclear-free zone on the region until all parties agree to it and significant
progress has been made on Mideast peace.
The U.N. conference on the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, which is held every five years, is expected to begin with a
bang Monday with an address by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who has condemned the West for its refusal
to disarm and for tacitly accepting Israel's nuclear capability.
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will follow the Iranian leader in the afternoon.
The U.N. talks come at a time when Iran is believed to be heading toward a nuclear capability and the U.S. and allies have
been pressing for new, tough Security Council sanctions to curb Tehran's program.
""The Iranians are clearly intending to spoil the party,"" said a senior U.S. official involved in the nuclear diplomacy. The
official highlighted the importance of raising Mideast nuclear-free zone issues.
The designation of the region as a zone free of weapons of mass destruction was a nonbinding agreement that emerged
from a 1995 U.N. review of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, a 1970 pact to limit the spread of nuclear weapons. That 1995
agreement was pivotal because it won the indefinite extension of the treaty, but no action on the zone has been taken
since.
Senior Obama administration officials said Friday the White House is willing to significantly advance a Mideast nuclear
weapons-free zone, and would support a conference on the subject at a future date. U.S. officials said talks with Egypt
would resume in New York in the coming month. Such a zone is envisaged to include Israel, the Arab states, Iran and
Turkey.
""We've made a proposal to them [Egypt] that goes beyond what the U.S. has been willing to do before,"" said the senior
U.S. official involved in the nuclear diplomacy.
U.S. officials stressed, however, that they didn't believe that would happen without first achieving major advances in
Arab-Israeli peace talks.
""We are concerned that the conditions are not right unless all members of the region participate, which would be unlikely
unless there is a comprehensive peace plan which is accepted,"" said Ellen Tauscher, undersecretary of state for arms
control and international security. She said the U.S. has also discussed the zone with the Arab League and other members
of the Nonaligned Movement.
The diplomacy could raise new tensions between President Barack Obama and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu if Washington is seen backing away from its commitment to Israel. Israel has voiced concerns that the U.N.
conference could turn into an international forum to corner Israel. Mr. Netanyahu backed out of a nuclear-security
conference in Washington in March due to such concerns.
An Israeli official said Friday that his government supports a Middle East freeze of WMD and nuclear weapons, but that
""it should be the culmination of a process that begins with bilateral and individual peace agreements between all the
countries in the region.""
The U.S. and Israel have been locked in a monthslong spat over Mr. Obama's calls for a complete freeze in building new
Jewish housing in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. U.S. officials have grown increasingly confident in recent days that
ties between the U.S. and Israel have stabilized. Mrs. Clinton said Friday that the Mideast peace process will get on track
next week, though not the U.S.-brokered direct talks involving Israeli and Palestinians that the Obama administration
wants to see.
Egypt's latest proposal calls for Israel's disarmament ""as soon as possible."" It also called for Israel's nuclear program to be
placed under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the U.N.'s atomic watchdog. That proposal won't
be accepted, U.S. officials said.
The Egyptian working paper demands NPT signatory states release ""all information available to them on the nature and
scope of Israeli nuclear facilities and activities, including information pertaining to previous nuclear transfers to Israel.""
U.S. officials indicated no such demands could be made on Israel.
Arms-control analysts familiar with the talks say the U.S. is likely to propose creating a U.N. envoy given the task of
calling a conference of Middle East nations to press forward on the nuclear weapon-free zone.
""They are desperate to buy off Egyptian objections,"" said Henry Sokolski, executive director of the Non-Proliferation
Education Center and a critic of the Obama administration's arms-control approach.
Daryl Kimball, executive director of the Arms Control Association, an advocacy group, said the U.S. acceptance of a
special envoy is a significant shift. A U.S. official refused to say whether the envoy proposal, first floated by Russia, was
part of the U.S. offer.
The last NPT conference in 2005 ended in collapse. But U.S. officials said they have been laying the groundwork for this
conference for nearly a year.
The White House wants rules to ensure that a country that withdraws from the treaty doesn't escape inspections and
sanctions. They also want more power for U.N. inspectors and more backing for multinational facilities that could help
nations develop peaceful nuclear power.
Write to Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com, Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com and Joe Lauria at
newseditor@wsj.com"
4671,"This call will be after indonesia. Oscar can u print for her?
Points for President Silajdzic call:"
4672,"Remind me to discuss this traffic w/ you.
Cdm"
4673,"Formal eur points on bosnia:
Proposed Points Follow:
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, April 24, 2010 1:16 PM
H; Oscar Flores
Bosnia"
4674,We prepared a call sheet that is in clearance now. Will send to you ASAP.
4675,"We've oot a 13Ian
Ellen will pass on details early next week."
4676,We can def ask.
4677,"I will be out of the office on official travel through Tuesday May 4. Please send any urgent action items to the SCA Staff
Assistants or SCA PDAS Pat Moon. Thanks, Bob"
4678,"I don't think it is, honestly -- but we should probably offer a date option to them when/if we call them to postpone.
Lona Valmoro
S • ecial Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
4679,"The UK election, I think, reflects lingering fixation on Tony. They just can't get over him. The British public feels like the
wife he abandoned for George W. Bush, wants vengeance, yet still pines for him. Clegg is a Tony stand-in love object,
Cameron a pretender. Alas, poor Gordon, Heathcliffe, unloved, unlovable, suffering."
4680,Agreed. That's being worked too.
4681,"I hope that you can read this (3 pages) before your meeting with Secretary Gates on pooled funding on Monday. I have
spent a lot of time thinking about these issues in the context of the QDDR, but I think if we're going to push the position I
suggest, it has to be now. If you agree, there are a number of ways we can make this quite attractive to other agencies as
well as DoD. AM"
4684,For you eyes only
4685,Ok
4688,"1.4(D)
Fyi
1.4(D) — Declassify on: 04/23/2035"
4689,"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanil@state.gov>
Saturday, April 24, 2010 7:53 PM
Re: Amano B1
1.4(D)
Yep --they've been distributed.
Scheland, Mark B6
1.4(D)
B1"
4690,"The Secretary's Call Sheet for Majority Leader Harry Reid
Saturday, April 24, 2010
BACKGROUND: Yesterday (Friday, April 23, 2010), Majority Leader Reid sent you a letter in
which he asked you to work with Congress to ""quickly complete action on the Iran sanctions
legislation."" Additionally, he encouraged you ""to support direct [peace] negotiations between the
Israelis and Palestinians.""
Iran Sanctions
Israeli-Palestinian Peace Negotiations
Call Notes:
<<Reid Call Sheet 4-24-10.docx>>"
4692,Going running at 8am
4693,"NOTE: NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC WILL BE TAPING B-ROLL FOOTAGE
THROUGHOUT THE DAY.
7:50 am DEPART Private Residence *En route State Department
8:00 am ARRIVE State Department
8:00 am OPENING SESSION OF US-PAKISTAN STRATEGIC DIALOGUE
9:15 am Benjamin Franklin Room, 8th Floor *Open press for first 30 minutes
9:15 am OFFICE TIME
9:35 am Secretary's Office
9:40 am MCC BOARD PREP
9:55 am Secretary's Office
10:00 am CHAIR MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION
12:00 pm (MCC) BOARD MEETING Principals Conference Room 7516
12:00 pm OFFICE TIME
1:00 pm Secretary's Office
1:00 pm VIDEOS (2)
1:05 pm John Jay Room, 751 Floor
1:10 pm CONFERENCE CALL w/SENATORS SHAHEEN AND VOINOVICH
1:25 pm Secretary's Office
1:30 pm PRE-BRIEF MEETING
1:45 pm Secretary's Office
1:45 pm PREP CALL w/DEFENSE SECRETARY GATES
2:15 pm Secretary's Office
2:30 pm BILATERAL w/PAKISTANI F.M. MAIM-
DOOM SHAH MEHMOOD
3:00 pm QURESHI Secretary's Conference Room *Official photo in East Hall preceding.
3:00 pm PRESS PRE-BRIEF
3:05 pm Secretary's Office
3:05 pm JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE w/PAKESTANI FM QURESHI
3:25 pm Treaty Room, 7th Floor
3:45 pm HEARING PREP w/RICH VERMA AND TEAM
4:30 pm Secretary's Office
4:30 pm DROP-BY AT THE RECEPTION FOR THE US-PAKISTAN
4:45 pm STRATEGIC DIALOGUE Benjamin Franklin Room, 8th Floor *Aprox. 270
ppl. expected.
4:55 pm DEPART State Department *En route Admiral Mullen's Residence
5:00 pm ARRIVE Mullen Residence
5:00 pm US-PAKISTAN SMALL GROUP DISCUSSION
7:00 pm Admiral Mullen's Residence, Quarters AA
7:00 pm US-PAKISTAN WORKING DINNER
9:00 pm Admiral Mullen's Residence, Quartets AA
9:05 pm (t) DEPART Mullen's Residence *En route Private Residence
9:15 pm (t) ARRIVE Private Residence
FYI:
7:30 am US-PAKISTAN STRATEGIC DIALOGUE BREAKFAST
8:00 am Thomas Jefferson Room, 81h Floor
12:30 pm US-PAKISTAN STRATEGIC DIALOGUE LUNCH
2:00 pm Benjamin Franklin Room, 8thFloor
1:30 pm US-PAKISTAN STRATEGIC DIALOGUE MEETING
3:30 pm Henry Clay Room, 8th Floor
###"
4694,Just sent to you in a separate email.
4695,"Yes
B5
For discussion:
B6
1. INL
cdm"
4696,"Really good stuff. Especially fantastic opening page
Getting very very good feedback
I can't even remember now what if anything in it bugged me yesterday. Nothing in it has anyone making a double take
to flesh out so far.
Its overall frame of the partnership paints you in exactly the way I think people respect you most, and I think Hirsh might
actually have come up with a theme that will stick.
Have only seen the cover photo online, I want to see the hardcopy since we all know it's the pictures that really matter.
Text on the cover is great"
4697,"Correct -
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, March 24, 2010 6:49 AM
H
RE: Personnel"
4698,Fyi
4699,"My update from this list:
Sandy Levin will be this week, working on the other Hill appointments and will get Walter I. in as soon as possible.
Staff retreat -- Idon't believe we could use Blair House on the 14th but Huma will remember better than me. The 28th
is the Friday before Memorial Day weekend, not sure if people have plans that would interfere?
I will follow up on Vietnam symposium and Idid call Reyes' office but never heard back so will try again tomorrow.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
B6"
4700,"You're very welcome. We've got a pretty good process in place handling the projects, and as always, we have a great
product to sell.
And as a non-Methodist list maker, this project now comes off mine, and Caroline will be crossing it off our white board
tomorrow, a very satisfying ritual. Esquire's should hit soon and will hopefully be as positive. Then it's just 60 left, and I
feel good about that too.
I would say that the one thing that's going to continue to be annoying is people pressing you on how long you'll serve.
When Tavis got you to say you probably won't for 8 years, that was especially stupid newsmaking on his part. Hirsh tried
it with four, and I think others will.
Might just be easiest to say, I've learned not to predict the future - including my own - but I intend to and hope to. We
have a lot to do, so much that we've started, and I want to see it through.
Or just a simple I hope to
If you don't you don't nobody's going to call you on saying you 'intended to' a year earlier. Again, the 8 years was
especially dumb speculation
But these questions are really code for are you happy, are you being treated well, do you have enough juice? And no
point to let people interpret the answer to their nefarious use."
4701,"PIR <preines( _
Sunday, April 25, 2010 10:36 AM
H .
Re: Newsweek"
4702,I checked last friday and was told it went up to you -- am checking again now. AM
4703,"I second Philippe's assessment. In a funny way, having the few negative quotes (which basically posit the standard
critiques) works in our favor, because the rest of the piece undermines/marginalizes them very effectively."
4704,"The word from Ramallah is quite positive. IF there are no announcements this week, we anticipate that the Arab League
Follow-up Committee will give its blessing on May 1 and Sen Mitchell can return to the region to start talking substance.
Given the Israelis' warning, this is a real If.
Karl/Frank will go in today to walk Karzai through the particulars of the visit - the only thorny part is that it has dropped
from 4 to 3 days. But it has all the same elements, plus a dinner with Biden.
Did you see reports that Iran has dropped out of the running for the UNSC? Trying to confirm.
Andrew S. will be sending you a long memo that responds to DOD's pooling proposals - it conveys a desire to work
together with DOD on this and offers some alternative ideas. He also canvassed the building on other topics and will
send a list up for your book tonight. He and I agreed that the list should just be for reference and that your approach of
having informal conversation on the big topics is the right one.
You saw CDM's email about the Sudan ad. Ben emailed yesterday to say he wants to talk Sudan comms strategy going
forward. Hopefully I'll reach him today. I know CDM is talking to Denis."
4705,"FYI
http://thecable.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2010/03/10/lugar no more money for development banks until reform
Lugar: No more money for development banks until reform
Posted By Josh Rogin Wednesday, March 10, 2010
In the wake of the global financial crisis, a slew of multinational development banks are asking for large amounts of new
capital to both replenish and in some cases expand their resource pools, and much of the burden will fall on the United
States.
This creates a unique opportunity for the Obama administration to press these organizations to implement long-awaited
reforms, according to the Senate's top Republican on foreign relations, who has a big say in whether and how the
Congress doles out the funds.
""As the world struggles to emerge from the worst economic crisis since World War II, it is an appropriate time to ask
whether the [International Financial Institutions] are performing optimally and doing the jobs they should be doing,""
reads a newly released report by the staff of Sen. Richard Lugar, R-IN, ""The crisis should not be used as an excuse to win
increases that could not otherwise be justified. As the requests for capital are negotiated with the international donor
community, there is a window of opportunity for significant reform.""
The report, which is the culmination of six years of research, including half a dozen hearings when Lugar was committee
chairman, outlines several dozen recommendations for what the Obama administration, Congress, and the banks can do
to update their relevance.
""Does the world really need the IMF, World Bank, African Development Bank, Asian Development Bank, European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, and Inter-American Development Bank today? Can they be changed to better
address our needs? How should we re-design them?"" the report asks.
""Such questions are particularly timely because nearly all the IFIs have sought, or will soon seek, major new infusions of
money from their donors, including the taxpayers of the United States.""
The Asian Development Bank has already asked the Obama administration for new funds, and the administration has
requested in its new budget $533 million in direct money and $12.8 billion in borrowing authority for the ADB.
A committee staffer told The Cable that Lugar wants to see progress on reform before he would support authorizing the
money.
""We want to make sure that before the American taxpayer puts more money in there that things are fixed,"" the staffer
said. ""It's not possible for them to do everything, but they could certainly make progress.""
The reforms the administration could press for in the short term include pressing the banks to focus more on
development goals rather than the structure and size of loans and ""work with the other donor countries to step back
and slow down the process,"" the staffer said.
Congress is also concerned that the Obama administration might not be interested in pressing for these reforms,
considering that Obama issued a signing statement in June indicating he did not feel bound to follow congressional
direction on such international negotiations.
Negotiations between several banks and the Treasury Department are ongoing. The U.S. side is led by Scott Morris,
deputy assistant secretary of the Treasury's Office of International Development Finance and Debt.
The issue will next surface at the end of March when the Inter-American Development Bank convenes its annual
meeting in Cancun.
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709"
4706,"Wow What a nice suprise. Thanks 4 words of support and enthusiasm alas my gain has given omaaley his nemisis.
The erlichs r running 4 gov. Both husband/wife were looking @ senate. But. Dem. Md. Will be like NATO. An. Attack on
one an attack on all am zipping around the. State and. Tweeting. Can u believe it. Along way from our perogi tours.
NY. ---- your are the best.
Sent from my BlackBerry Wireless Handheld"
4707,"I have asked Jose to get you a more detailed report but I.must tell you the opening of the USA Pavilion has been a great
success so far - at least among the expo-goers. A few vignettes.
- while we don't want to brag to our Chinese hosts, our Pavilion has become the most popular. During the trial runs last
week, the Chinese expo-goers rushed directly from the gates to the USAP (and even broke some of our turn-styles).
Needless to say, the Chinese have improved security. On EACH of the first two days, 30,000 pple visited. Lines are long
and pple are loving the show. We are also getting many foreign officials to visit.
-the 100 US college student ambassadors (who act as guides and speak Mandarin) are the biggest hits of the pavilion.
Fair-goers stand in line to have their photo's taken w them. They explain the show and send a great message.
- the story line that we thght was simplistic is quite popular (the overture where Americans try to say hello in mandarin
is met w howls of laughter and Act ll called the Garden is doing well). During the thunderstorm scene a mist comes from
the ceiling and some pple put up their umbrellas. Act I is a bit too commercial but the audience claps and take photo's
when you and President come on the screen.
- we are selling tons of USA merchandise - the two most popular items - mini-basketballs with the USAP seal on it and
the bison stuffed animals - who knew?
Anyway, thght u'd enjoy the quick report. I cannot imagine us not being here! We will keep you posted.
Smart power works!"
4708,"You'll get from Derek and me tonight a short agenda with framing questions for the Iran meeting tomorrow. Derek is on
call to act as a sort of conductor and move the conversation along, if need be."
4709,"I had a very good chat with VMI
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
(direct)"
4710,Ok
4711,In the process of doing that.
4712,"Thnx on GPF. A lot of ideas out there.
Kurt and Hormats were looking into it. Will bug them in the am."
4713,yes — I can talk now — does now work for you?
4714,No -- I will add.
4715,"Also is the gender entity in there -- the new women's agency Look at my UN remarks last week I have several parags on
it"
4716,Did you get what you need? Is there anything else that might be helpful to you?
4717,"No, should be there"
4718,"Campbell, Kurt M <CampbelIKM@state.gov>
Monday, April 26, 2010 6:33 AM
Re: Futenma
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
Thanks Madame Secretary in HK on the way to Tokyo.
yvill know more in Tokyo tomorrow and will
report to you directly. Best Kurt"
4719,It should be ready for you. We'll get it on your desk.
4721,I just confirmed that we sent it up on Friday and it definitely went into the line.
4722,I'll check on Durmer and take care of the rest.
4723,"You signed as letter to Durmer on April 6th. I sent the numbers to WJC, and asked Morningstar to call Clark. He will let
me know once they've spoken."
4724,Sandy levin returned your call
4725,Do you want notes/background material or a script for your remarks at the memorial? Also Madeira
4727,"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Monday, April 26, 2010 3:09 PM
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; DiMartino, Kitty; Douglas, Walter T; Macmanus, Joseph
FW: Update on your trip to Doha
FYI, I will be going to Doha this weekend to meet with Al Jazeera. Also plan to meet with CENTCOM and then onto Kabul
for two days of meetings. Back next Thursday.
im"
4728,Interesting.
4729,Absolutely. Already working on it.
4730,"1. Colorado
2. June 2011
3. Policy plan"
4731,"PIR <preines
Monday, April 26, 2010 9:52 PM
Re: Nice picture!
Today's to do list read:
1) Remove all copies of Post from 7th floor
2) Prevent item from appearing in clips
3) Avoid HRC at all costs, provide no opportunity for ribbing
As you can see I went 0 for 3"
4732,"FYI — today the SFRC will take up at its business meeting the State Dept authorization bill. We have been
working with them for months on this package, and they have taken virtually all of our provisions in
tact. There are a few problems (minor) that we will continue to work on those, but all in all it is a good
package. Unfortunately, it will never become enacted, so it is largely a symbolic gesture, but it is helpful
nonetheless. Thought Kerry or Lugar might mention it to you, and our general posture has been to thank
them for their efforts."
4734,"You might consider making a statement on the deleterious international effects of Arizona's unwise and precipitous law
violating traditional American values of liberty, especially in light of Mexican President Calderon's condemnation. Seems
like a complete freebie. Sid"
4735,Have readout at your convenience.
4736,"1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
From Johnnie,
Regards, Johnnie"
4737,Nice.
4738,"I refined my earlier draft and worked in
(LM3) is in your book for tonight.
see what you think. The new draft"
4739,"B5
On the speech it mieht be 15 but not much more. Dan K-P has taken over drafting B6
He has been incorporating fine-tuning edits today. I will email you a draft shortly, which will be tweaked
Unfortunately, there is no teleprompter at the UN. B5
On your book, I understand that Huma will bring it out in the morning."
4740,"April 27, 2010
For: Hillary"
4741,Remind me to discuss when we talk
4742,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, May 2, 2010 10:44 PM
Fw: current speech
NPT Revcon TT DKP v8 5 2 10.docx
The speech is attached. Let me know if you need me to send it elsewhere to be printed."
4744,Yes - will call at 930am - have calls starting now
4745,fyi
4746,"Not yet.
She said she would send it but haven't got info yet.
III check in"
4747,Well well
4748,"you are going to be in estoniaand as you know we talked about israel for this trip as well potentially (although maybe we
are never going there....).
ii told zach becfore they scheduled to do it earlier in the week if they really wanted you to be able to come.
he said they couldnt and you and i discussed getting the dvd for you.
i did tell cvc as well that moving party from the april 10th date to the 24th would make it difficult for you to go. unless
you want us to make the schedule work somehow."
4752,"8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:00 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:00 am BREAKFAST w/ WOMEN ENTREPRENEURSHIP SUMMIT
9:15 am ATTENDEES Benjamin Franldin Room, 8"" Floor
9:30 am BIWEEKLY MEETING w/MANAGEMENT TEAM
10:00 am Deputy Secretary's Conference Room
10:00 am WEEKLY MEETING w/UNDER SECRETARIES
10:45 am Secretary's Conference Room
11:15am PHONE CALL w/OAS SECRETARY GENERAL JOSE MIGUEL INSULZA
11:30am Secretary's Office
11:30 am OFFICE TIME
2:00 pm Secretary's Office
2:00 pm BILATERAL w/TUNISIAN FM KAMEL MORJANE
2:30 pm Secretary's Conference Room *Camera spray in Treaty Room preceding.
2:50 pm REMARKS TO THE ANNUAL IRAN WATCHERS CONFERENCE
3:00 pm Delegates Lounge, First Floor *Official photo.
3:15 pm MEETING w/FAMILIES OF IRAN HIKERS
3:30 pm Secretary's Office *Official photo.
4:00 pm BILAT w/HONDURAN SEC' Y OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS MARIO
4:30 pm CANAHUATI Secy's Conf. Room *Camera Spray in Treaty Room preceding.
4:30 pm OFFICE TIME
7:00 pm Secretary's Office
7:05 pin DEPART State Department *En route Shiloh Baptist Church
7:25 pm ARRIVE Shiloh Baptist Church
7:30 pm COMMUNITY CELEBRATION OF LIFE FOR DR DOROTHY HEIGHT
8:00 pm (t) Shiloh Baptist Church, 1500 Ninth Street, NW
8:05 pm (t) DEPART Shiloh Baptist Church *En route Private Residence
8:20 pm (t) ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
4753,"I
1
Jiloty, Lauren C <JilotyLC@state.gov> 1
Thursday, April 29, 2010 6:46 AM
H
Re: Number for cohns
B6"
4754,Fyi before u talk to dai.
4756,"From ops:
CG Shanghai provided the update below on Chinese President Hu's visit to the U.S. pavilion at the Shanghai Expo. For
your situational awareness:
SWO Chinese President Hu Jintao visited the USA Pavilion at the Shanghai Expo around 12:30 p.m. for 15-20 minutes
Thursday, April 29 (Shanghai time). USA Pavilion Commissioner General Jose Villarreal and Consul General Beatrice
Camp greeted President Hu, who was accompanied by Vice Premier Wang Qishan, Shanghai Expo Bureau officials, and a
large contingent of Chinese media. Hu then walked through the pavilion's initial section (the ""Overture"") where Vice
Premier Wang Qishan called attention to all the logos of the pavilion's sponsors. The Chinese president also viewed a
film clip of President Obama welcoming visitors to the pavilion and shook hands with about 10 of the nearly 80 U.S.
""student ambassadors"" staffing the pavilion. Before departing, President Hu thanked Commissioner General Villarreal
and wished the USA Pavilion great success."
4757,"BEIJING, April 29 (Reuters) - A knife-wielding man injured 28 children, two teachers and a security guard in a
