Democratic votes.
But Ohio voters support 53 - 40 percent giving people the option of a government health insurance plan.
Independent voters support this public option 55 - 38 percent.
Afghanistan
The United States is doing the right thing fighting in Afghanistan, Ohio voters say 48 - 43 percent. Voters
support 51 - 40 percent the recommendations of the top U.S. commanders in Afghanistan that 40,000 more U.S.
troops should be sent.
""But 55 percent of Ohioans say they are only willing to see large numbers of American troops in Afghanistan
for two years or less, which is hardly a mandate for the type of long-term commitment that the Pentagon has
said will be needed for victory,"" said Brown.
From November 5 - 9, Quinnipiac University surveyed 1,123 Ohio voters, with a margin of error of +/- 2.9
percentage points. The survey includes 406 Republicans and 394 Democrats, each with a margin of error of +/-
4.9 percentage points.
The Quinnipiac University Poll, directed by Douglas Schwartz, Ph.D., conducts public opinion surveys in
Florida, Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Ohio and the nation as a public service and for
research. For more data or RSS feed- http://www.quinnipiac.edu/polling.xml, call (203) 582-5201, or follow us
on Twitter.
Sen. Christopher Dodd (D-CT) is still in serious trouble in his re-election race with 53% of voters saying he does not
deserve re-election, a new Quinnipiac poll finds.
Connecticut voters disapprove, 54% to 40%, of the job Dodd is doing, compared to a 49% to 43% disapproval in
September.
In general election match ups, Dodd loses to both Rob Simmons (R), 49% to 38%, and to Linda McMahon (R), 43% to
41%."
3256,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, November 22, 2009 10:44 AM
H
FW:
FYI"
3257,Just tried you - went to vox - calling ops
3259,"Also, assume you are giving any edits to documents directly to richard? Ops called to see if you were going to send edits
back thru secure fax. I assume you are not."
3261,Will do
3262,"Hillary: This is the most provocative and significant analysis to come out of the recent election. Its author is a right-wing
Republican lawyer based in Richmond who also writes a column for Human Events. I disagree with the ideological and
partisan undercurrent of the piece, especially his overemphasis of the deficit as an overriding political factor rather than
the administration's lack of achievable results so far in improving the living standards of ordinary people. There is no
reason why the deficit shouldn't become a merely abstract factor once there are actual benefits delivered. The pattern of
the past is that the deficit, the talisman of Hoover Republicans, moves only partisan Republicans and that Democrats
ascend if the economy is progressing, its gains are widely spread and new social programs have favorable universal
impact. That is not happening now. This analysis, therefore, may be portentous. Worth reading. The electoral maps of VA
don't show up in the email but they are described. Sid
Return to the Article
November 13, 2009
Can the Clinton Coalition Survive Obama?
By Sean Trende
John Judis and Ruy Teixeira's well-regarded 2002 work The Emerging Democratic Majority begins with a vignette set in
Virginia. They tell the story of a telecom executive named Mark Warner, who runs a moderate campaign that appeals to
upper-middle class suburbanites and working class rural voters, and manages to put together a winning coalition that, if
imitated in other states, might put the Democrats in power for decades to come.
Democrats did build coalitions similar to Warner's, and in fact had been doing so for the better part of a decade. Warner's
coalition was essentially Bill Clinton's 1996 coalition. The coalition and brand that Clinton built was an extraordinarily
successful one for Democrats, breaking the momentum of a resurgent GOP in 1996, and ultimately enabling the election
of the most liberal President in American History last year.
Given this background, it's only appropriate that the first tangible sign that this coalition is coming unglued has come in
Virginia. Republican Bob McDonnell won the governorship with almost 59% of the vote — the highest percentage (though
not the highest victory margin) for any governor since 1961. The entire Republican ticket won by similar margins, and the
GOP picked up six seats in the General Assembly. It could have been even worse — five Democrats won their Assembly
races by fewer than 1,000 votes.
There are some superficial lessons to be drawn here. After last week's election, it's silly to argue that the GOP brand is
too damaged for them to take advantage of Democratic weakness. And the Democrats' latest spin — that their weakness
among Independents was simply a function of more Republicans calling themselves independents but retaining their
Republican voting habits — puts the lie to the argument that Republicans' low self-identification is a salient factor in
elections.
But the most important lesson is this: while there's little predictive value in off-year elections, they do provide snapshots of
the mood of the electorate, and the present state of political coalitions. Given Virginia's primacy in the story of Democratic
coalition building, it gives us a good snapshot of the state of that coalition. And it's not a pretty one for Democrats.
The historical base of the Democratic Party for two centuries has long been what Jay Cost and I call Jacksonians:
Culturally conservative, hawkish, and populist whites located throughout the South and Border states. They began
breaking away from Democrats in the 1950s and 1960s — their reaction to the Party's embrace of unions, blacks and
liberals is a story is so well known there's no need to rehash it here.
But this group remained at least in play for the Democrats. Clinton inherited a coalition consisting of minorities, liberals,
urban voters, and a decent remnant of Jacksonian voters in the Ohio River Valley and the South, who still preferred a
moderate-to-conservative Democrat to a Republican. This coalition became a majority coalition when Clinton used a
combination of fiscal conservatism and social moderation to bring suburban voters on board. This was a huge innovation
for Democrats; suburbs like Nassau County, NY, Orange County, CA and Fairfax County, VA had fueled the rise of the
Republican parties in those states. Clinton moved them substantially toward his side. This coalition allowed him to win by
eight points in 1996; absent Perot and a last-minute fundraising scandal, he probably would have won by more.
Clinton intuited that suburban voters are, generally speaking, culturally cosmopolitan — they don't like it when you call
someone ""macaca,"" and aren't crazy about the religious right. But they're generally not particularly socially liberal either,
and are fans of ""law and order."" They like taxes low and appreciate economic growth, but like good schools and a clean
environment. Having to balance a bunch of spending priorities with somewhat limited income in their daily lives, balanced
budgets are the ultimate ""good government"" indicator for these voters.
Clinton delivered on all of these issues, keeping tax increases fairly small, and balancing the budget for much of his term.
In so doing — and this is very important — he re-branded the Democrats as the party of fiscal responsibility, economic
growth, moderate taxes, and smart government. In other words, he finally shed the ""Carter"" label for the Democrats. This,
in turn, made it plausible for his much more liberal heirs to benefit from this presumption of competence for Democrats -
one that they probably would not have enjoyed without him.
George W. Bush's presidency, in turn, was an upper-middle class suburbanite's nightmare. An aggressive social agenda,
a fiscal trainwreck, two poorly-managed wars and a financial collapse later, these suburban voters trended even more
heavily Democratic then they were in the Clinton era. By 2008, Democrats held most of the suburban districts around ,
major metropolitan areas, and were threatening in the exurbs. The right Democratic candidate probably could have put
together a massive 2008 Presidential majority, combining minorities, liberals, Jacksonians, Catholics, and suburbanites.
The mood of the country was certainly right for a 1920/1932/1952/1980 result.
But the Democrats nominated Barack Obama. The party's grip among Jacksonians had weakened since Clinton left the
stage, but they abandoned Obama completely. Jay Cost and I have detailed this here. This movement is why Obama
received 53% of the vote, instead of the 60% or so we might expect given the voters' attitude toward Bush's Presidency.
Obama was able to win even without this branch of the Democratic party because he generated such intensity among the
remaining portions of his base. In other words, while his base wasn't as broad as Clinton's, it was deeper. Faced with
vanishing 401ks and home values, and disgust with Bush's presidency, suburbanites flocked to him. Liberals were
enthralled to finally elect one of their own. And minorities turned out heavily for the opportunity to elect the first black
President.
But this presents a problem. You only get to elect the first black President once, and governing a coalition of suburbanites,
poor blacks, and upper class liberals isn't easy. It is hard to keep that enthusiasm up. And with the Jacksonian wing of the
party gone, if that enthusiasm dissipates, or if one of the coalition groups becomes disgruntled and starts to shuffle out the
door, the party isn't left with much.
We see a microcosm of this story in last Tuesday's elections, especially in Virginia. Let's backtrack to 2001, and look at
the counties that Mark Warner won.
The coalition that Warner built was similar to Clinton's. To oversimplify some, it blended together rural Democrats in the
mining counties in the west of the state, college voters around Charlottesville, and black voters combined with rural whites
in the south central and southeastern portion of the state with suburban voters in the northeast. It was a diverse coalition,
but it worked.
Now let's compare Warner's map with Obama's map in 2008:
The suburbs stayed in the Democrat's camp, for reasons discussed above. But look what happens in the west! That area
becomes solidly Republican. Buchanan and Dickenson counties in the Virginia panhandle voted for Dukakis, Mondale,
and Adlai Stevenson (twice). Obama became only the second Democrat to lose these counties since the UMW moved in
during the 1920s.
As I said, this isn't a problem so long as (1) the Jacksonians show a willingness to come back for a candidate other than
Obama and/or (2) the suburbs continue their love affair with the Democrats. But we see indications in Virginia that the
Jacksonian divorce may, in fact, be permanent. Creigh Deeds was from the western section of the state, and seemed — at
least on paper — capable of remaking the Mark Warner map. It didn't happen, obviously. Let's look at how Virginia
changed from Bush's 2000 election to Deeds' loss last week:
The redder a county is, the more it moved toward the Republicans from 2000 to 2009; bluer counties moved toward
Democrats.
We see that McDonnell did as well as Bush did in the suburbs — but no better. Those pockets of white are the DC
suburbs in the northeast, the Hampton Roads area in the southeast, and Richmond just to the north and west of Hampton
Roads. Its rural Virginia — which is still about 1/3 of the electorate — that made the difference between Bush's 54% in
2004 and McDonnell's 59% on Tuesday. Even with Obama off the ticket, and a much less cosmopolitan figure atop the
ticket, rural Virginia went solidly Republican.
We can take another angle here. Deeds and McDonnell squared off in a very close Attorney General race in 2005. Let's
compare Deeds' 2005 showing to his 2009 performance. [NOTE: In this map, we look at ""relative movement."" Because
everything in the state moved toward McDonnell, a map just showing ""movement"" would be solid dark red, and not of
much use. So instead, if something moved more than 9 points toward McDonnell, it is colored a shade of red, if it moved
less than 9 points toward McDonnell, it is blue. Think of this as showing the change in the counties' PVI].
We see the same result. Just since 2005, rural Virginia has moved sharply against the Democrats. The suburbs haven't
moved much at all, relative to the rest of the state, while the more heavily African American counties in the southern
portion of the state have moved a few notches leftward (in absolute terms, they voted in 2009 as they had in 2005). This
suggests lasting damage to the Democratic brand here that is not simply personal to Obama.
Now let's look at how McDonnell did when compared to McCain in 2008. Again, because the movement here was so
dramatic statewide, we need to isolate the biggest and smallest changes by looking only at ""relative"" shifts.
The western counties of the state didn't shift much from 2008, but that's because they were already giving Republicans
around 70% of the vote — there wasn't much room for Republican growth (and remember, ""blue"" in a relative map still
means slight movement toward the Republican since 2008)! The real Republican gains over the past year have come in
the DC exurbs, in the 1-95 corridor, and to a lesser extent in the Hampton Roads area.
In other words, the Jacksonians aren't returning to the Democrats, at least in Virginia. Deeds might still have been able to
win without them, but the Democrats are also showing weakness in the Virginia suburbs. In other words, two pieces of the
Clinton-Warner coalition are starting to break away.
This is a real problem for the Democrats. If the suburbanites and the Jacksonians move away from the party, there is
very, very little left for them. And there's reason to think that the suburban weakness is real. Obama's fiscal policy, to
make an understatement, hasn't been Clintonian. It may not be entirely his fault, but the $787 billion stimulus, the trillion
dollar healthcare bill, the automobile bailout, and the budget showing trillion dollar deficits extending for the next decade
make suburbanites shudder. They don't much like debt, and they intuit this spending is going to have to be paid for at
some point — probably by them. Voters still give Obama some benefit of the doubt, as they do most Presidents in their first
year, but they are becoming very, very worried, and probably don't put much stock in Candidate Obama's promise to
enact a net spending cut any more.
Democrats will doubtless chalk this up to Creigh Deeds' inept campaign. Deeds wasn't a great candidate, but when the
mood of the country is starting to swing against your party, it is hard to run a good campaign. Jerry Kilgore found this out
when he ran in a similar environment in 2005, and was reduced to attacking Tim Kaine for his religious views on the death
penalty. And if you run the Deeds-McDonnell race in 2006 or 2008, I think its hard to argue McDonnell would win by 18
points, even holding everything else equal.
The other problem with this explanation is that we saw similar results replicated around the country. Most of the seats in
the House of Delegates that the Democrats lost in Virginia, or came close to losing, were suburban. The Philly suburbs
voted Republican for the state Supreme Court. Bergen County New Jersey didn't give the Republican 60% of the vote like
it did in 1984, but Chris Christie nearly carried it, and even though he is significantly more conservative than Christie Todd
Whitman or Tom Kean, he won the largest margin for a first-term Republican Governor since 1969. Conservative
Republicans won elections in Westchester County, New York, and Republicans picked up two City Council seats on the
outskirts of Queens. Republicans won back the Nassau County legislature -- the Democrats' capture of that body figures
prominently in the introduction to Emerging Democratic Majority -- and nearly defeated the Democratic County Executive
there with an obscure, underfunded candidate. In other words, in places that have never heard of Creigh Deeds or seen
his attack ads on McDonell's thesis, the Democrats still lost suburban voters.
States with a Democratic base of liberals, urbanites, and minority voters -- like California and New York -- haven't moved
much against Democrats. Obama's polling numbers, as well as those of Democratic candidates for Governor and
Senator, in classic ""Emerging Democratic Majority"" states like Colorado and Nevada are not looking good at all. And of
course in Jacksonian states like Kentucky, he's below 40%.
This doesn't mean that Democrats are doomed in 2010. An improved economy, Republican missteps, and a host of other
factors could keep the band together for them. Maybe some of the more marginal voters that Obama brought to the polls
to enact hope and change will return in 2010 to keep hope alive. But the personal nature of Obama's victory is starting to
show its downside for downticket Democrats.
The Clinton coalition is looking creaky. If Obama doesn't improve and the coalition comes apart, Democrats could find
themselves weaker than they were even in the 1980s and 1990s.
Sean Trende can be reached at strende@realclearpolitics.com.
Page Printed from:
http://www.realclearpolitics.comiarticles/2009111/13/can_the_clinton_coalition_survivethe_age_of_obama_99046
.html at November 13, 2009 - 08:19:49 AM CST"
3264,Yes
3265,Ihave a copy.
3266,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, November 13, 2009 4:06 PM
H
FW:
RELEASE IN PART
B6
fyi"
3270,tomorrow.
3272,"http://www.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2009-11-22/think-before-you-travel/?cid=hp:mainpromo2
The White House might try to blame the State Department (such an easy and delicious target) for the missteps. But
State's role in the conceptual planning of the trip was not central, and the department's senior Asia hand, Kurt Campbell,
surely knew better. It's also hard to tar the National Security Council's own senior Asia expert, Jeff Bader, another pro like
Campbell. Perhaps even higher officials at the NSC dropped the ball. Perhaps Mr. Obama might take responsibility
himself, as President Kennedy did after the Bay of Pigs fiasco in 1961. Now, that would truly clear the air—and open the
door to some obvious and necessary changes in the administration's decision-making machinery. Every decision, large
and small, is shaped and made by the president himself and enforced by Denis McDonough, a deputy NSC adviser and
the administration's Lord High Executioner. Does Obama get enough pushback? Is he hearing a range of views? Can he
see that his powerful intellect might profit from bowing to the voices of experience? If Mr. Obama reflects on the Asia
journey and other mishaps, he might loosen the reins and bring in additional policy and diplomatic pros as inside
counselors or outside advisers.
Amateur Hour at the White House
by Leslie H. Gelb
November 22, 2009 I 10:50pm
The Asia trip was not worth Obama's time. Leslie H. Gelb on why the president should shake up his
foreign policy team—and make sure the deals are done before he leaves home.
President Obama's nine-day trip to Asia is worth a look back to fix two potent problems, past and future. First, the trip's
limited value per day of presidential effort suggests a disturbing amateurishness in managing America's power. On top of
the inexcusably clumsy review of Afghan policy and the fumbling of Mideast negotiations, the message for Mr. Obama
should be clear: He should stare hard at the skills of his foreign-policy team and, more so, at his own dominant role in
decision-making. Something is awry somewhere, and he's got to fix it.
Secondly, the Asia trip presented an important opportunity to carve out a new American leadership role in the world's
most dynamic economic region, and Mr. Obama missed it. He only scratched the surface in his calls for multilateralism
and mutual understanding. He needs to paint pictures of how Washington will help solve regional security and trade
problems. Otherwise, most Asian nations will continue their unwanted drift toward China and away from the United States.
A meditation on his journey should start by forgetting half of the last week's commentary. Unbelievably, some criticized
Obama for not getting China to ""throw its weight around."" What Asian leaders want that? None that I know of. Others
lamented that Obama couldn't make ""demands"" on China anymore. The presumption here is that China is now king, and
that Washington can no longer have its way with Beijing. The facts are that Washington never did boss Beijing around,
and that China is not now ruling the roost (more accurately, it's sitting on its own eggs). Others contended that Obama
continued his pattern of trashing America's friends and coddling its authoritarian enemies like China. It's hard to stomach
this nonsense from the same conservative crowd that forever praised George W. Bush for accommodating China and
alienating America's allies.
Some analysts played fair and acknowledged that administration officials tried to tell reporters not to expect ""deliverables""
on the trip, and to see the journey more as a recognition of Asia's new importance and America's desire for a new co-
operative spirit. That's a commendable thought, but hardly justification for almost two weeks of the president's time (when
you consider preparations)— especially when he's got a tanking economy, health-care reform woes, and decisions to
make on Afghanistan. Presidents take trips like this one only when they need breakthroughs and accomplishments on
certain issues that can't be agreed on without the pressure of an impending presidential visit. In fact, most presidents
wouldn't even commit to trips abroad without knowing that key deals would be finally agreed on and announced during the
visit itself. The prospective visit is the power jackhammer to nail down the deals. Just take a gander at trips planned for
Richard Nixon by Henry Kissinger or for George H. W. Bush by James Baker.
Obama's travels were a chance to settle or make concrete progress on thorny issues like greenhouse-gas emissions, and
the fate of U.S. bases on Okinawa, which the new Japanese government insists on moving. It was time to announce ways
to gain fixes on the U.S.-South Korean trade treaty, long stalled in Congress. It was a moment to show that Beijing would
actually make some mutually beneficial compromises on exchange rates or economic sanctions against Iranian and North
Korean nuclear programs. Absent guarantees of progress on issues such as these, Mr. Obama should have taken a well-
deserved vacation in Hawaii.
Matters were made worse on the scene. It was not good optics for Obama to bow to Japan's emperor. He seems to do
this stuff spontaneously and inexplicably, as with his bow to the Saudi King some months ago. And it was truly unfortunate
that Obama and his aides didn't flatly insist that he be allowed to address the Chinese people directly on television and
meet with non-stacked Chinese groups—as has been the case during previous presidential visits. Beijing's leaders
obviously didn't feel confident enough of their own standing at home to give the popular Mr. Obama such access. But he
and his team should have made it a precondition of the visit. Its absence left an unhappy taste.
The Asia trip presented an important opportunity to carve out a new American leadership role in the world's most dynamic
economic region, and Mr. Obama missed it.
The White House might try to blame the State Department (such an easy and delicious target) for the missteps. But
State's role in the conceptual planning of the trip was not central, and the department's senior Asia hand, Kurt Campbell,
surely knew better. It's also hard to tar the National Security Council's own senior Asia expert, Jeff Bader, another pro like
Campbell. Perhaps even higher officials at the NSC dropped the ball. Perhaps Mr. Obama might take responsibility
himself, as President Kennedy did after the Bay of Pigs fiasco in 1961. Now, that would truly clear the air—and open the
door to some obvious and necessary changes in the administration's decision-making machinery. Every decision, large
and small, is shaped and made by the president himself and enforced by Denis McDonough, a deputy NSC adviser and
the administration's Lord High Executioner. Does Obama get enough pushback? Is he hearing a range of views? Can he
see that his powerful intellect might profit from bowing to the voices of experience? If Mr. Obama reflects on the Asia
journey and other mishaps, he might loosen the reins and bring in additional policy and diplomatic pros as inside
counselors or outside advisers.
If most Asia hands inside and outside the government had designed the Obama trip, here's what they would have
advised: Go beyond the usual and trite message of building mutual understanding and cooperation, and stop invoking the
God of Multilateralism without spelling out America's leadership role. Asia is now overflowing with multilateral
organizations. Washington is a member of a few key ones, like Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and the Asian
Development Bank. But that has little to do with other new and key groupings such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (Russia, China, Uzbekistan, etc.) and ASEAN, the association of Southeast Asian nations. Asian nations are
increasingly organizing themselves into these groups, and Washington hasn't really figured out its role. Most Asian
nations want that role to be a prominent one—in fact, the leadership position. They're afraid of China, afraid that China
won't be as attentive to their concerns in the future as America was in the past. At the same time, they don't want
Washington to come into these groupings and cause problems with Beijing. They want Washington to figure out a
leadership position constructed on the proven American ability to help solve common problems in the common interest.
They want an America they remember, one that can get things done and doesn't let problems fester.
That U.S. policy was the main missing ingredient on Obama's trip. Washington played architect and solidified its
leadership in Europe after World War II with NATO, the Marshall Plan, and various trade and economic organizations like
the World Bank. Asian nations are yearning for the same kind of creativity today from a brilliant American president in the
new Pacific Era.
Leslie H. Gelb, a former New York Times columnist and senior government official, is author of Power Rules: How
Common Sense Can Rescue American Foreign Policy (HarperCollins 2009), a book that shows how to think about and
use power in the 21st century. He is president emeritus of the Council on Foreign Relations.
For more of The Daily Beast, become a fan on Facebook and follow us on Twitter.
For inquiries, please contact The Daily Beast at editorialathedailvbeast.com.
http://www.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2009-11-22/think-before-you-travel/p/"
3273,Let me know when you are up
3274,"roy spence asked if u would say hello and take a picture with his friends. Its not john wren but someone else who works
at omni corn and his wife. Can we do later today in lobby on way out to airport?
Also, cathy hall is in town too. Also asking if she can say hello and thought we could do the same. What do u think?"
3275,"Tauscher, Ellen 0 <TauscherE0@state.gov>
Sunday, November 15, 2009 12:17 PM
H B6
Hillary! Thank you so much. How fabulous you were on Meet the Press. I'm so proud of you. I'm in Prague on my way to
Ankara Tuesday. Started off in New Delhi on Thursday and yes, Jim will be with us at your house for dinner Friday night.
Please stay safe on your travels and I'm so thrilled to work for you.
Best,
Ellen"
3277,They are calling you now.
3278,"I forgot to verbally tell you this today, but kiobuchar also has a call into you and she is on your grid."
3279,"H: The NYU Center on Law and Security, (where I remain associated as a senior fellow), has doen the work on terrorism
trials, especially in NY. The Center is closely involved with the NYPD terrorism unit; Mike Sheehan, whom you remember
as director of counterterrorism at State in the Clinton administration and at NYPD terrorism unit, is at the Center as a
fellow. Key statistic to cite:
What Kind of Results Can We Expect?
The New York City conviction rate for individuals charged with terrorism when it involved a US target
is 100%.
Sid"
3280,"I am traveling and have limited access to email. Please contact my office Chief of Staff, Simon Limage at
LimageSG@state.gov."
3281,"You should leave soon. They confirmed they are starting on time at 8pm.
Yang confirmed for 10:30. Ops will connect to the house."
3282,"Was just scanning now. All I'm finding are wire headlines on the coffee.
Looking to see if your KSM answer - specifically, ""I'm not going to second guess - is taken as less than full throated"
3283,"Not sure where you went but wjc tried to reach you.
He's now in with netanyahu.
Will call back when he's done."
3284,"There is a famous American movie called Field of Dreams, and in it, the hero - Kevin Costner - builds a baseball field at
his remote farm, he carves it out of his crop. Some people don't think what he's doing makes sense, they think it's a risk
- but he is a true baseball fanatic and he loves the game and he takes on the project because he keeps hearing...
""If you build it., they will come...
If you build it, they will come.""
Well ladies and gentlemen, I am proud to say that we built it, and we care coming to the Shanghai World Expo"
3285,"H: If Roubini is right, and he's been mostly right so far, one of the few, then without additional and large stimulus
devoted to putting a floor on job loss, the pressure on protectionism will be far more intense. (Protectionism, by
any name, should not be dismissed as a targeted tool in an ongoing policy to force China to revalue its currency.
The US is not without means here.) The deficit will be high in any case and the Republicans will always attempt to
exploit it no matter what its number. Whether another stimulus can pass Congress is another matter. Still, what
matters in the short-run--and long-run--are achievable results. To most people, the deficit is an abstraction;
employment and housing--and insecurity about both--are their vital, concrete and immediate issues. Sid
http://www.nydailynews.com/opinions/2009/11/15/2009-11-
15_the_worst_is_yet_to_come_unemployed_americans_should_hunker_down_for_more job_lo.html
The worst is yet to come: Unemployed
Americans should hunker down for more job
losses
BY Nouriel Roubini
Sunday, November 15th 2009, 4:00 AM
Think the worst is over? Wrong. Conditions in the U.S. labor markets are awful and worsening. While the official
unemployment rate is already 10.2% and another 200,000 jobs were lost in October, when you include discouraged
workers and partially employed workers the figure is a whopping 17.5%.
While losing 200,000 jobs per month is better than the 700,000 jobs lost in January, current job losses still average more
than the per month rate of 150,000 during the last recession.
Also, remember: The last recession ended in November 2001, but job losses continued for more than a year and half until
June of 2003; ditto for the 1990-91 recession.
So we can expect that job losses will continue until the end of 2010 at the earliest. In other words, if you are unemployed
and looking for work and just waiting for the economy to turn the corner, you had better hunker down. All the economic
numbers suggest this will take a while. The jobs just are not coming back.
There's really just one hope for our leaders to turn things around: a bold prescription that increases the fiscal stimulus with
another round of labor-intensive, shovel-ready infrastructure projects, helps fiscally strapped state and local governments
and provides a temporary tax credit to the private sector to hire more workers. Helping the unemployed just by extending
unemployment benefits is necessary not sufficient; it leads to persistent unemployment rather than job creation.
The long-term picture for workers and families is even worse than current job loss numbers alone would suggest. Now as
a way of sharing the pain, many firms are telling their workers to cut hours, take furloughs and accept lower wages.
Specifically, that fall in hours worked is equivalent to another 3 million full time jobs lost on top of the 7.5 million jobs
formally lost.
This is very bad news but we must face facts. Many of the lost jobs are gone forever, including construction jobs, finance
jobs and manufacturing jobs. Recent studies suggest that a quarter of U.S. jobs are fully out-sourceable over time to other
countries.
Other measures tell the same ugly story: The average length of unemployment is at an all time high; the ratio of job
applicants to vacancies is 6 to 1; initial claims are down but continued claims are very high and now millions of
unemployed are resorting to the exceptional extended unemployment benefits programs and are staying in them longer.
Based on my best judgment, it is most likely that the unemployment rate will peak close to 11% and will remain at a very
high level for two years or more.
The weakness in labor markets and the sharp fall in labor income ensure a weak recovery of private consumption and an
anemic recovery of the economy, and increases the risk of a double dip recession.
As a result of these terribly weak labor markets, we can expect weak recovery of consumption and economic growth;
larger budget deficits; greater delinquencies in residential and commercial real estate and greater fall in home and
commercial real estate prices; greater losses for banks and financial institutions on residential and commercial real estate
mortgages, and in credit cards, auto loans and student loans and thus a greater rate of failures of banks; and greater
protectionist,pressures.
The damage will be extensive and severe unless bold policy action is undertaken now.
Roubini is professor of Economics at the Stern School of Business at New York University and Chairman of Roubini
Global Economics.
Read more: http://www.nydailynews.com/opinions/2009/11/15/2009-11-
15 the worst is yet to come unemployed americans should hunker down for more job lo.html?print=1&paqe=all#i
xzz0WwHGikNI"
3286,"I met with Steve.
We had a good cony and discussed a number of areas of focus, most of which are WI.
Take a look and flag any concerns.
I am going to discuss with Jack this am.
Cdm"
3287,calling
3288,"1.4(D)
B1
Heading home after visit to Bangladesh where you are remembered with great affection and where they are eager to
have you make a return visit.
It was a reunion for me in many ways -- the experiences from '95 still vivid, and it was a positive message that I came 1.4(B)
back! 1.4(D)
B1
Our amb there is terrific. (Moriarty). He's going to keep close tabs on the situation. The sum of all this seems to be
political. It's so sad.
I'll give you a fuller readout on this and the trip more generally.
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 11/16/2024"
3289,FYI — Bill Burns cannot move his meeting.
3290,"Hope you are well this morning. I will be in the hold room if you need any assistance. We had a fun dinner with Phillippe
and Jake last night. Wish you were with us! Best Kurt"
3292,"sbwhoeop
Tuesday, November 17, 2009 8:57 AM
H
FYI: Lead FT editorial today, must if you haven't read. Sid
Financial Times FT.com
OMMENT
editorial
US fumbling for a new China tone
Published: November 16 2009 20:39 I Last updated: November 16 2009 20:39
Gone are the days when the US president could visit Beijing as the unassailable top dog, able to lecture the Chinese on
everything from human rights to an overvalued currency. As has become fashionable to note, events have instead obliged
Barack Obama to play the role of washed-up debtor visiting his stern bank manager for yet another loan.
That analogy is useful. But it can be overdone. Certainly, the financial crisis has brought into sharp relief just how
dependent the US has become on foreign creditors, chief among them China.
It has also sharpened the perception of what had been happening anyway, the relative decline of a US-centric west and
the relative rise of a China-centric Asia. But the word relative is important. China, poor and riddled with internal
contradictions, is not there yet, by a very long way.
The changing relationship with China does demand a new tone. But early indications are that Mr Obama is still fumbling
for the right one. Take global imbalances.
In the only set-piece speech of his Asian tour — delivered in Japan, perhaps to assure his hosts that Washington is not
abandoning Tokyo just yet — Mr Obama correctly pointed out that the global economy cannot go back to business as
usual. ""One of the important lessons this recession has taught us is the limits of depending primarily on American
consumers and Asian exports to drive growth,"" he said.
That is quite right. But his entreaties on global rebalancing fall flat in China. That is partly because Beijing remains publicly
sceptical about the US's long-term finances.
From China's perspective, Mr Obama's emergency measures to stimulate the US economy and persuade Americans to
spend their way out of recession smack of re-creating the spendthrift ways that triggered the crisis in the first place.
That explains why Chinese officials have quizzed their US counterparts so robustly about how they intend to pay for
healthcare reform. It is also why Beijing has started questioning US monetary, as well as fiscal, policy.
On the eve of the US president's visit, Liu Mingkang, China's chief banking regulator, took a swipe at the US Federal
Reserve, saying the combination of a weak dollar and low interest rates risked generating a global asset bubble. That is a
bit rich coming from someone who oversees a banking system that has pumped the equivalent of nearly 30 per cent of
gross domestic product into the economy so far this year. But it reflects the new tone with which China presumes it can
address a humbled superpower.
Mr Obama's efforts to occupy the moral high ground are also undermined by his flirtation with protectionism, particularly
his decision to slap tariffs on Chinese tyres.
His administration has failed to spell out a convincing trade policy — and that is seen as a stark omission for-a business-
oriented Asian audience. Such perceived deficiencies have hobbled his ability to cajole China with any real conviction.
When it comes to human rights, too, the US seems to have drawn the conclusion it is not good policy to badmouth its
chief creditor.
Hillary Clinton, secretary of state, set the tone early when she said that human rights should not ""interfere"" with matters of
implicitly greater urgency. Mr Obama obligingly omitted all references to Tibet, Xinjiang and even Taiwan from his Tokyo
speech. There was also not a single mention of India, a potential regional counterweight to China, yet another indication
that Washington is behaving as though it is treading on eggshells. It was therefore all the more refreshing to hear Mr
Obama criticise Chinese censorship during his town hall meeting in Shanghai on Monday — though even that could not
undo his own self-censorship in refusing to meet the Dalai Lama before this week's trip.
It is right and proper that the US acknowledge the rising significance of China. Mr Obama's assurances that China's rise
need not be a threat were spot on. But by the same token, US accommodation can be taken too far. Contrary to common
perception, China's huge holdings of US treasuries are not a sign of great strength. They are evidence of how dependent
Chinese growth has been on the US consumer.
Equally, any idea that China, with an economy less than a third the size of the US and a GDP per capita roughly the same
as Angola's, can somehow save the world is ludicrous. Mr Obama is right to show respect to China. He need not — and
must not — kowtow.
Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2009. Print a single copy of this article for personal use. Contact us if you wish to
print more to distribute to others.
""FT"" and ""Financial Times"" are trademarks of the Financial Times. Privacy policy I Terms
© Copyright The Financial Times Ltd 2009."
3293,"Council on Foreign Relations
Expert Brief
The U.S.-China Economic Relationship: Separating Facts from Myths
Steven Dunaway, Adjunct Senior Fellow for International Economics
Author:
Former deputy director of the Asia and Pacific department at the International Monetary Fund. Author
of the Council Special Report, Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis.
November 16, 2009
http://www.cfr.org/publication/20757/uschina_economic_relationship.html?breadcrumb=°/02Fregion%2F271%2Fchina
Many myths surround the economic relationship between the United States and China. Four, in particular, stand out, and
it is important to identify them as myths to avoid misunderstandings that could adversely influence policy decisions. The
fact that China has become the largest foreign holder of U.S. government securities is taken as indicating that the United
States is heavily dependent on China to finance its budget deficits. Similarly, since China is a major source for U.S.
imports, U.S. consumers are seen as dependent on cheap Chinese goods. In addition, the Chinese authorities have
emphasized that they strongly resist external pressures to try to influence policy decisions and that economic instability in
China is bad, with adverse implications for the rest of the world.
Taken together, these four myths could lead to the conclusion that China should not be pushed hard by the United States
(or other major countries) to more quickly change its policies, especially its exchange rate policy, to facilitate the
rebalancing of its economy. But such a conclusion would be a major mistake, and that is why during his trip to Asia,
President Barack Obama needs to dispel these myths and bring pressure to bear for faster economic policy changes in
China. This would be in keeping with the objectives for dealing with global imbalances laid out by the G-20 summit in
Pittsburgh in September 2009.
Myth No. 1: Washington has limited leverage because China is the main ""banker"" for the United States
China holds a large amount of U.S. government securities. Of China's $2.3 trillion in official reserves, it is estimated that
70 percent is held in U.S. dollar assets. China is a big customer for U.S. debt, but it is not America's banker. Nor is the
United States dependent on China to finance its budget deficits. If China elects not to buy U.S. Treasuries, there are other
willing public and private sector buyers, as indicated by the strong demand for these securities worldwide. Although the
U.S. government might have to pay higher interest rates as an incentive to get other investors to buy Treasuries in the
event that the Chinese reduce their demand, the increase in interest rates would likely be small.
Major consequences from a decision by China to reduce its purchases of U.S. Treasury securities would depend on the
reason behind the decision. It would be in China's best interest (and beneficial for the rest of the world as well) if China
reduced its purchases of U.S. Treasuries because it decided to stop heavily managing its exchange rate and allow greater
flexibility in the currency's movements. This is an important policy change that is required if China is going to rebalance its
economy and be able to sustain rapid growth.
China is a big customer for U.S. debt, but it is not America's banker. Nor is the United States dependent on China to
finance its budget deficits.
If instead China continues to heavily manage its exchange rate, it will build up large additional amounts of official
reserves. If it decides to hold less of these additional reserves in U.S. Treasury securities, then China will increase its
purchases of assets denominated in other currencies, with euro-denominated securities being the most likely alternative.
In these circumstances, China would continue to intervene in its exchange market, with the central bank buying U.S.
dollars for Chinese renminbi and then selling dollars for euro to acquire European assets. The result would be an
appreciation of the euro. Consequently, countries in Europe, not the United States, would probably be most affected by
China's move because the negative impact of euro appreciation on European economic activity would likely far outweigh
the effects on the United States of smaller Chinese purchases of Treasuries.
Alternatively, China could choose to start dumping its stock of U.S. securities. The result would be appreciation of other
major currencies (depending on where China would decide to park its reserve assets); upward pressure on U.S. interest
rates; and the possibility of financial market disruptions if China dumped its U.S. dollar assets rapidly. However, the U.S.
Federal Reserve could limit the rise in U.S. interest rates and would be able to ensure adequate liquidity to prevent market
disruptions. But a decision to dump Treasuries would have a large effect on China itself. The country would incur a
substantial capital loss on its reserve assets. The Chinese authorities are deeply concerned about such a loss, and are
very unlikely to decide to dump U.S. assets. In fact, the discussion initiated by China regarding the need for an alternative
official reserve asset is motivated by its concerns about potential losses on its U.S. dollar holdings.
Myth No. 2: The United States is heavily dependent on cheap Chinese goods
This is not really true. Only roughly 15 percent of U.S. imports come from China. Moreover, all of the basic types of
manufactured consumer goods that China exports to the United States (clothing, textiles, footwear, toys, small appliances,
etc.) can be imported from other countries or could be produced domestically. The prices for goods that could substitute
for products from China would be higher, but the difference in costs would be relatively small. Competition among
producers has become fiercer, and as a result cost differentials between goods from China and other suppliers are
narrowing.
Dependence actually runs the other way. China is highly dependent on U.S. demand for its products. Economic growth in
China is heavily dependent on exports. Although China has been able to achieve its 8 percent GDP growth target in 2009
owing to the stimulus to domestic demand provided by government policy actions, the country will struggle to meet this
objective in 2010 and succeeding years if demand for its exports in the United States does not pick up.
Myth No. 3: External pressure on China for policy changes is counterproductive.
The Chinese authorities stress that in the face of external pressure, they tend to strongly resist economic policy changes.
The Chinese have in particular used this argument to try to fend off pressures for appreciation of the exchange rate. While
no country wants to appear to be weak and susceptible to external pressure, the truth is that, if there is no pressure, there
is less incentive to change policy. This is especially true in China, where the authorities are wedded to the status quo
because of past success and inclined to make only gradual changes to economic policies. Recent developments in
China's exchange rate illustrate this point. In the absence of external pressure since August 2008, China has reverted to
fixing its exchange rate relative to the U.S. dollar.
Without a hard push from the United States on a bilateral and multilateral basis, changes in China's policies are likely to
be delayed, and that is not in the best interest of the United States and the rest of the world.
Myth No. 4: Instability is bad for China
Chinese authorities also have suggested that instability in China is bad for the rest of the world because of adverse effects
on China's growth rate. But instability (or the fear of instability) has played a big role in initiating economic policy changes
in China. For example, concern about instability arising from the growing gap between urban and rural incomes has been
a major factor behind new initiatives to develop China's interior (such as the Develop the West program) and to improve
conditions and opportunities for the rural population (including breaking down restrictions and discriminatory treatment of
migrant workers). Hence, for China, instability is not necessarily bad, but it is a problem for the authorities. Instability in
China also is not necessarily bad for the rest of the world because of its effect on China's growth. Although China
accounts for a significant portion of world GDP growth, the country does not generate much demand for products from
other countries given China's large trade and current account surpluses. Some countries in Asia and commodity
producers may be benefiting from China's strong growth, but overall, it is not providing much stimulus for the world
economy as a whole, so slower growth in China will have little effect on economic activity in the rest of the world.
It is important for President Obama to separate fact from myth in his economic policy discussions with the Chinese
authorities during this trip to Asia to build a sounder relationship. The president should not shy away from pushing the
Chinese hard on economic reform and rebalancing of China's economy, but this should be done in his private discussions
with China's senior leaders. Multilateral discussions, such as those in the context of the G-20 process, are a much more
effective forum for the United States to take a public stance on China's economic policies jointly with other major
economies.
Without a hard push from the United States on a bilateral and multilateral basis, changes in China's policies are likely to
be delayed, and that is not in the best interest of the United States and the rest of the world. It also is not in the best
interest of China, because without a shift away from heavy dependence on investment and exports to drive growth toward
greater reliance on consumption, China will not be able to sustain rapid economic growth and development. Getting China
to fully realize this and to act more quickly than the authorities are inclined to do is a considerable task for the United
States and other major economies."
3294,Corning
3295,"Jake, capricia, philippe and I going to
Left u note upstairs.
Cdm wants u to call.
Leaving eikenberry memo for u."
3296,FYI
3297,"I will be traveling next week so I will not be in the office.
If there are time-sensitive matters that I can address this week rather than next week, please let me know.
Best.
cdm"
3298,"Yes, will call now."
3299,"B1
1.4(D)
See below."
3300,"Thanks, Hillary. I don't know about details of Obama's plan, but you looked terrific at the speech.
(Lincoln, in 1864, on Obama's plan: ""The difficulty is not in stating the principle, it is in applying it."")
Too bad Rep. Wilson didn't wear a red pantsuit.
Max continues to rocket--up to #8 overall this am, #1 in every nonfiction category except cookbooks.
And last night in an special election Jackie was elected Advisory Neighborhood Commissioner in DC.
It was a hard fought race, in fact, and her opponent ran a negative campaign against her on email
with the slogan: ""She's Not Jackie.""
Here's the draft of the article Max has written on the bad Joe Wilson (membership in racist
organization) and that will be published today. This should do it.
Let's speak when you have time.
Rep. Joe Wilson's Rebel Yell
Inside the racist klavern that Joe Wilson joined
By Max Blumenthal
Since Republican Rep. Joe Wilson of South Carolina bellowed at President Barack
Obama, ""You lie!"" during the president's nationally televised speech on healthcare,
the fourth term backbencher has emerged as a hero among the conservative
grassroots. One of the most enthusiastic endorsements of Wilson's histrionics came
from the Sons of Confederate Veterans (SCV), a group that Wilson has <a
href=http://crooksandliars.com/david-neiwert/obama-heckler-joe-wilson-member-
neo>belonged to</a> for several years.
""Mr. Wilson, never apologize for allowing your love of truth to overrun your desire
to be polite,"" the SCV Tea Party <a
href=http://scvteaparty.com/?p=165>declared</a> on its website. ""It is the liar who
must apologize, not the one who identifies the liar!""
Who are the SCV? A once-proud organization of Confederate history buffs and re-
enactors who spent their organization's money to restore Civil War-era battlefields
and Confederate cemeteries, by 2006 the SCV was substantially <a
href=http ://www. sp lcenter. org/inte l/intelreport/artic le .j sp?pid=1027 >taken
over</a> by an organized cadre of white supremacist radicals (read <a
href=http://www.splcenter.org/intel/intelreport/article.jsp?pid=154 >here</a> for
more background) who sought to turn the nation's oldest Southern historical society
into what the veteran white supremacist activist Kirk Lyons called ""a modern, 21st
century Christian war machine capable of uniting the Confederate community and
leading it to ultimate victory."" When the racist junta had seized much of the SCV's
leadership positions, the Southern Poverty Law Center released an <a
href=http://www.splcenter.org/intel/intelreport/article.jsp?sid=90 >extensive
list</a> of SCV officials who belonged to ""hate groups.""
Lyons, a key leader of the white supremacists who took over the SCV, had <a
href=hftp://www.thenation.com/doc/20050829/blumenthal/single >harbored
dreams</a> of creating a seemingly benign front group for a more sophisticated
version of the Ku Klux Klan. ""I have great respect for the Klan historically, but,
sadly the Klan today is ineffective and sometimes even destructive,"" Lyons told a
German neo-Nazi magazine in 1992. ""It would be good if the Klan followed the
advice of former Klansman Robert Miles: 'Become invisible. Hang the robes and
hoods in the cupboard and become an underground org anization.'"" With the SCV,
Lyons discovered he didn't have to go underground after all.
Once Lyons helped install his close friend, Ron Wilson, as president of the SCV,
the organization's political newsletter, <a href=http://fpacscv.org/southernmercury/
>The Southern Mercury</a> (where Wilson served as senior editor), transformed
into a propaganda mill for crude white supremacist cant. Mailed to all dues-paying
members of the SCV — presumably including Rep. Joe Wilson — until it went
defunct in 2008, the Mercury has published articles describing blacks as genetically
inferior to whites, calling African-Americans as ""a childlike people,"" and warned
that if Obama runs for re-election, race riots of an ""exceedingly violent nature""
would immediately ensure, leaving ""entire sections of some of our cities in ruins.""
Here are a few highlights from the Southern Mercury:
""After the turn of the 20th century, the white Southerners had disfranchised and segregated
the blacks, in perhaps the mildest reaction possible at=2 Othat time to the blacks' transgressions.
The blacks — then a childlike people — had been selling their votes to the Democrats en masse for
$.25 apiece in national elections.""
--""Where We Stand Now, And How We Got Here,"" by Frank Conner, Southern Mercury,
September/October 2003
""Previously, anthropologists had routinely recorded the notable differences in IQ among
the races; but at Columbia, a liberal cultural anthropologist named Franz Boas...decreed that
there were no differences in IQ among the races, and the only biological differences between the
blacks and whites were of superficial nature... Meanwhile, the liberals in the media heaped
special praise upon black athletes, musicians, singers, and writers — and treated them as typical
of the black race. The liberals were creating a false image of the blacks in America as a highly
competent people who were being held back by the prejudiced white Southerners.""
--Conner, September/October 2003
""It is very clear to me that if Barack Obama should be elected President, he would be
extremely anti-white and would demand reparations for slavery and press hard for affirmative
action to the degree that it would hurt young whites who were seeking jobs or admission to
College and Graduate Schools.""
--""Americans Face The Worst Presidential Candidates In History,"" by Robert Slimp, Southern
Mercury, May/June 2008
""I believe that [Obama's] rhetoric and anti-white legislative proposals would stir up racial
riots. If he were running for re-election, these riots would turn into an exceedingly violent nature
that would seriously damage race relations in America, and leave entire sections of some of our
cities in ruins.""
--Slimp, May/June 2008
Rep. Joe Wilson could have resigned from the SCV as soon as the organization's
takeover by open white supremacists began. But he didn't. Or he could have
withdrawn his membership when the SCV's flagship journal turned into a racist rag.
But he didn't. Instead, while serving as a state senator, Wilson led an SCV-inspired
campaign in 2000 to keep the Confederate flag flying above South Carolina's state
capitol. ""The Southern heritage, the Confederate heritage, is very honorable,""
Wilson <a href=http ://news. bbc . co .uk/2/hi/americas/503579.stm>proclaimed</a> at
the time, responding to critics of the Confederate flag.
Wilson's rebel yell at Obama has electrified the Republican grassroots, filling his
campaign coffers with donations <a
href=http://wwvv.freep.com/article/20090910/BLOG36/90910072/Wilson-takes-
case-online--pleads-for-donations>he is soliciting</a> from conservatives across
the country and earning the undistinguished, previously unknown backbencher
primetime appearances on right-wing talk shows. Wilson has become the new voice
of the Republican opposition, reigniting the Lost Cause as a raucous crusade to
sabotage healthcare reform."
3301,Will also print
3302,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, December 1, 2009 7:13 PM
H
We left message for suozzi.
He's supposed to be home after 5:30. And reachable at"
3303,"8:00 am BREAKFAST w/SENATORS MCCAIN, LIEBERMAN AND COLLINS
9:00 am James Monroe Room, 8th Floor
9:00 am DROP-BY MEETING w/SE MITCHELL
9:15 am S Conference Room
9:30 am MEETING w/LT. GENERAL PAUL SELVA (JCS)
9:40 am Secretary's Office
9:55 am MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR TERRENCE LEE BARNICH,
10:30 am George C. Marshall Auditorium
10:50 am BRIEFING w/CHRISTOPHER HILL U.S. AMBASSADOR TO IRAQ
11:50 am Secretary's Conference Room
11:50 am DROP-BY w/CAMBODIAN PARLIMENTARIAN MU SOCHUA
11:55 am Secretary's Office *Official photo.
11:55 am DEPART State Department *En route White House
12:00 pm ARRIVE White House
12:00 pm ONE-ON-ONE MEETING w/RAHM EMMANUEL
12:45 pm COS Office, West Wing
1:00 pm SUNDAY MEETING PREP
2:45 pm White House Situation Room
2:50 pm DEPART White House *En route State Department
2:55 pm ARRIVE State Department
3:00 pm WOMEN'S FUND MEETING
3:30 pm Secretary's Office
3:40 pm DEPART State Department *En route Andrews AFB
4:05 pm ARRIVE Andrews AFB
4:15 pm DEPART Andrews AFB via Air Force Aircraft Tail ilTbd *En route New York, NY
5:05 pm ARRIVE LaGuardia Airport
5:10 pm DEPART LaGuardia Airport *En route Beacon Theater
5:55 pm ARRIVE Beacon Theater
6:00 pm KEYNOTE REMARKS AT THE SEPTEMBER 116 NATIONAL
6:45 pm DAY OF SERVICE COMMEMORATION Beacon Theater
6:50 pm DEPART Beacon Theater *En route Waldorf Astoria Hotel
7:10 pm ARRIVE Waldorf Astoria Hotel
7:15 pm THE ROOSEVELT INSTITUTE'S FOUR FREEDOMS AWARD
9:00 pm CEREMONY AND GALA DINNER Grand Ballroom, Waldorf Astoria Hotel
9:05 pm DEPART Waldorf Astoria Hotel *En route Private Residence
###"
3304,Will bring tomorrow
3305,fyi
3306,Remind me to discuss
3307,"Importance: High
Just following up on a few items.
First, see below on Nagorno-Karabakh.
Third, on QME, Gates and Barak are meeting the week of UNGA and we are holding until then if you are comfortable
with that.
Fourth, Declan Kelly is going to be in Belfast Monday and Tuesday with Lou Susman. I will be there Tuesday for all of the
official meetings. Declan and I will stay Tuesday night after Lou leaves and have dinner with a broad cross-section of
folks.
Fifth, I'm working with Holbrooke's and Lew's shops on the materials for Af/Pak, and we'll have a concept paper over
the weekend on the UNGA curtain raiser.
Sixth, Mike Fuchs and I met with Team WHA on Mexico, following up on Carlos' memo. Mike is working with WHA to
ensure that we create a productive agenda and outcomes for the Merida meeting you will participate in at UNGA.
(SBU) Reports about an alleged lethal incident along the line of contact in Nagorno-Karabakh remain
unconfirmed. The potential implications on the peace process are not yet clear. At the moment, regional
leaders are responding cautiously and the impact on other regional processes does not appear
significant. The Armenian Ministry of Defense denied any unusual activity along the line of contact; the
Azerbaijan Ministry of Defense told media that incidents are frequent along the line of contact. Embassy
Yerevan reports that it is customary to deny reports of sniper incidents along the line of contact, but that an
incident of this magnitude would be difficult to cover up. Embassy Baku notes that President Aliyev is in
Kazakhstan and local authorities could be waiting for his return before deciding on how to proceed. Neither of
our Embassies have been able to confirm local media reports.
John L. Espinoza
Deputy Director
Office of Caucasus Affairs and Regional Conflicts
Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs
Department of State
17€:
Tel: 202-647-6795
Fax: 202-736-7915"
3308,That will be hard unless you leave white house early.
3309,"Madam Secretary,
Thank you so much. It is very exciting to finally see the book in print (when I first got a copy I was almost afraid to look
inside it!). I hope you enjoy it. And yes, I have been working with Lissa and others on the democracy/human rights
speech.
On the question about UK soldiers - the UK lost more soldiers in the Falklands than they have in Afghanistan:
255 in the Falklands
235 in Afghanistan (including British forces personnel and MOD civilians)
Please let me know if you would like any other information on that.
Again, thank you so much, and Happy Thanksgiving!
Sincerely,
Mike"
3311,"for purposes of submission of testimony to committee/public release, how do you want to handle? may have to
send to hill before/concurrent with call.
On Wed, Dec 2, 2009 at 7:59 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Ok let's discuss in call."
3312,"Great, will add to the calendar and list for discussion."
3313,"Super, thanks. Gina
On Wed, Dec 2, 2009 at 6:38 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
I would love to see you on Dec 14th as you pass thru town. I'm asking Huma and Lona to schedule a time for
us to catch up. Hope all is well w you and yours, H"
3314,"Here is rasmussen statement at press conf today:
On behalf of NATO, I warmly welcome President Obama's announcement on the new US approach and commitment to
the mission in Afghanistan. President Obama's decision to substantially increase the numbers of US forces in the NATO-
led operation is proof of his resolve; the overall approach he laid out is a broader political strategy for success. The
United States' contribution to the NATO-led mission has always been substantial; it is now even more important.But this
is not a US mission alone: America's Allies in NATO have shared the risks, costs and burdens of this mission from the
beginning. As the US increases its commitment, I am confident that the other Allies, as well as our Partners in the
mission, will also make a substantial increase in their contribution. Taken together, the new force contributions from
across the Alliance, as well as the new approach agreed by all the ISAF countries, will help create a new momentum in
the mission in 2010."
3315,"10.
Thought you might want to know that our Kevbo is being honored at Chicago-Kent College of Law--
distinguished alum that he is. Anyway, just found out this morning and, of course, not from
Kevin. Betsy
On behalf of the Chicago-Kent
Alumni Board of Directors, we
invite you to join us at the 2009
Alumni Awards & Recognition
Luncheon. The event honors
this year's Alumni Award
recipients as well our alumni
and friends who volunteered
for the law school over the past
year.
Thursday, December 10,
2009
Reception: 11:30 a.m. —
Luncheon: 12:00 p.m.
The Standard Club
320 S. Plymouth Court,
Chicago, IL 60604
RSVP to alumskentlaw.edu
by Tuesday, December 8,
2009.
Chicago-Kent College of Lew Office of Alumni
Relations 565 W. Adams St., Suite
310 Chicago, IL 60661
Tel: (312) 906-5240 Fax (312) 906-5256 E-
mail: alumsakentlaw.edu Web:
www.alumni.kentlaw.edu
This email was sent to . To ensure that you
continue receiving our emails, please add us to
your address book or safe list.
manage your preferences I opt out using
TrueRemove®
Please note: Clicking ""opt out"" will remove you
from ALL email communication from Chicago-Kent.
If you would only like to opt out of receiving
invitations or the monthly Alumni E-Brief,
please click here to edit your email settings.
Got this as a forward? Sign up to receive our
future emails.
powered byg"
3316,"Jack lew is sending a note to you tonight about 2010 budget passback. he's hoping you will be able to review tonite. And
is available to discuss with you.
Will get to you as soon as its ready."
3317,FYI
3318,FYI more — I've spoken to Jim who is addressing but we can catch up about this when we speak.
3319,Assume this is something you want to do that we can lock on a date?
3320,Peres call confirmed for 8:30am.
3321,Richard hoibrooke asking to speak to you. Says he's available till 9am.
3322,"We tentatively told the plane 9nm wheels up. Do u want to leave earlier? Later?
1P4"
3323,Changing to 10. Not a problem.
3324,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, September 12, 2009 10:18 AM
H
Re: Tonite
Ill think of a place.
Mitchell can talk secure from plane. They will call your secure phone soon."
3326,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, September 12, 2009 10:02 AM
H
They just reached mitchell on plane. He will call back soon.
1.67"
3327,wife is
3328,"Cc:
RELEASE IN FULL
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, September 12, 2009 10:42 AM
Oscar Flores
H
Mitchell trying to reach hrc on secure phone on 3rd floor."
3329,Yes its actually mitchells phone on plane that's having the problem. They r reconnecting to his plane and trying u again.
3330,Mitchell calling one more time now.
3331,"Yes no problem to take the van
III meet you at la guardia"
3333,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, September 12, 2009 2:58 PM
H
Re: Question"
3335,"Fyi below - ellen and I have been speaking today and I am addressing personally so don't worry and will advise if you
need to step in.
Will call you around 430 or later - whatever works.
Cdm"
3336,"Yes, we can. Melanne would be happy to hear that!"
3337,"Arnold schwarzenegger called for you. Assume its about his climate change conference which we have regretted to his
stff.
Ops has his contact info
f.31"
3338,"Near you, there is a palena on connecticut which is rated one of the best restaurants in dc. Use fresh local produce for
everything.
There's also bourbon steak in the four seasons. They have some quiet booths and the food is really good."
3339,she likes.
3340,Calling in 5 min
3342,"Huma's right, she will be over the moon!"
3343,"FYI
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, November 25, 2009 11:08 AM
H
FW: FW: Uganda Death Penalty for Homosexual Activity Pending Law"
3344,John kerry trying to reach you.
3345,DRL did not have any more definitive sourcing on this. Does the below provide what you need?
3346,calling you now
3347,DRL did not have any more definitive sourcing on this. Does the below provide what you need?
3348,DRL did not have any more definitive sourcing on this. Does the below provide what you need?
3351,Will do.
3352,Will do.
3353,Will do.
3357,"Huma Abedin
Sunday, September 13, 2009 8:07 AM
'SullivanJJ@state.gov'
RELEASE IN PART
B6
III do so now."
3358,FYI
3359,Importance: Low
3360,FYI
3361,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 13, 2009 8:09 AM
H
Mitchell asking to talk to you after your white house meeting fyi."
3362,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 13, 2009 8:17 AM
H
Holbrooke says he needs to talk to you before wh mtg.
21:13"
3363,Non secure
3364,Feel free to call if I can help with anything before the meeting today. Ops can reach me at my DC apartment.
3365,"Juanes' wife gives birth to son in Miami
Not sure why jim mcgovern wants you to know this but fyi"
3366,"For hRC's review it's time sensitive and due today, so if you can print for her that would be ideal.
'anks.
ca.)."
3368,"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Friday, December 4, 2009 3:31 AM
Iran
The EU meets in the coming days, and we are hoping for a strong public - and private - position on Iran. Bill has
identified 5 countries that need touching to help drive a good outcome:
I know Huma has discussed with you, but a 2-minute discussion with each that underscores the key points reflected on
your card would do the trick, if you can swing it.
Tx. Also, the intervention, with your modifications, turned out well. The process, in this case, did not generate a good •
enough product -- I tried to make it clearer and stronger this morning and your amendments helped a lot."
3369,"I actually went to respond on Friday and received an email saying the dinner had been cancelled!
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
(202) 647-9071"
3370,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, September 14, 2009 6:51 AM
H
FW: for S
Memo for S on activities.docx
I have comments on this so don't want to accept as final until giving them to her and you.
CUrn"
3373,"Secretary Clinton Host
Mr. Les Moonves CBS
Mrs. Christine Schwarzman Benefit Committee
Mr. Matthew Cowles Artists Committee Guest (Baranski)
Ms. Mimi O'Donnell Artists Committee Guest (Hoffman)
Mr. Frank Langella Artists Committee
Ms. Christine Baranski Artists Committee
Mr. Stephen Schwarzman KC Chairman
Ms. Barbara Walters Artists Committee Guest (Langella)
Mr. Philip Seymour Hoffman Artists Committee
Ms. Julie Chen CBS
Mr. Edward Albee Former Honoree"
3374,"sbwhoeop
Friday, December 4, 2009 3:57 PM
H: Suggestion... Sid
You might use this phrase: Milestones determine timelines.
Then in discussing milestones you can broaden the discussion beyond military targets to political and diplomatic
objectives."
3375,"Will do - taking off from miami now - will call you once we get there around 330pm
XO
Cdm"
3376,It starts at 2. I will call to give you a download as it unfolds.
3377,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, September 14, 2009 10:51 AM
H
FW: Hitting Bottom in Foggy Bottom
RELEASE IN FULL
FP
FortAgn Policy
Hitting Bottom in Foggy Bottom
The State Department suffers from low morale, bottlenecks, and bureaucratic ineptitude. Do we need to kill it to save it?
BY MATTHEW ARMSTRONG I SEPTEMBER 11, 2009
Discussion over the fate of Foggy Bottom usually focuses on the tenure of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, the troubles
of public diplomacy, and the rise of special envoys on everything from European pipelines to Afghanistan and Pakistan.
But Americans would benefit more from a reassessment of the core functionality of the U.S. State Department.
Years of neglect and marginalization, as well as a dearth of long-term vision and strategic planning, have left the 19th-
century institution hamstrung with fiefdoms and bureaucratic bottlenecks. The Pentagon now funds and controls a wide
range of foreign-policy and diplomatic priorities -- from development to public diplomacy and beyond. The world has
changed, with everyone from politicians to talking heads to terrorists directly influencing global audiences. The most
pressing issues are stateless: pandemics, recession, terrorism, poverty, proliferation, and conflict. But as report after
report, investigation after investigation, has highlighted, the State Department is broken and paralyzed, unable to
respond to the new 21st-century paradigm.
But how did it get so bad? Is it possible to fix? Or should we just push it over the wall like a great Humpty Dumpty and
reassign the pieces?
There is growing evidence that the internal machinations of the State Department have corrupted its ""core missions"" of
traditional diplomacy and public diplomacy. This year, for example, the Government Accountability Office (gao) found
that the department completely failed in its now four-year-old attempt to reorganize its nonproliferation bureau (a
bureau that remains leaderless). Besides failing to address mission overlap, low morale, and lack of career opportunities,
the failed reorganization caused a significant drop in expertise in offices focused on proliferation issues -- including
""today's threats posted by Iran, North Korea, and Syria,"" the gao's report said -- and coordination with bodies like the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Another report by the State Department's inspector general this year described severe and broad dysfunction within the
Africa bureau, while ignoring -- perhaps considering it a given -- the lack of departmentwide integration and leadership
in operations. Examples of the dysfunction range from not providing public diplomacy personnel with computers
capable of reading interoffice memos to a failure to effectively work with the new Africa Command.
By necessity, the Defense Department has stepped in where State Department has tuned out: Foggy Bottom relies on
Pentagon funding and even personnel for basic operations central to its mission. For example, the Defense Department
now performs much strategic communications work traditionally the purview of the State Department. In Somalia, for
example, the State Department's budget for public diplomacy is $30,000. The Pentagon's is $600,000. And, in the State
Department's bureaucratic wisdom, the $30,000 does not even belong to its undersecretary for public diplomacy and
public affairs.
Further, rivalries between the different ""cones"" -- or career tracks, referred to by one insider as the ""conal caste system""
-- at the State Department severely impact morale, career growth, and even operations. The report on the Africa bureau
noted that in 2002, public affairs and public diplomacy was a ""failed office"" -- and that the situation is worse in 2009.
Public outreach workers said the bureau's leadership ""does not understand public diplomacy."" The sentiment is
widespread. A 2008 report by a congressional ombudsman, the U.S. Advisory Commission on Public Diplomacy,
described a systemic failure to support and train public diplomacy officers in the field, as well as professional
discrimination against those in the career track.
Attempts to fix the State Department have focused on short-term issues, such as ameliorating its shortages in human
and financial resources. The last eight secretaries of state have attempted to bolster the department by bolstering its
bottom line. No less than Defense Secretary Robert Gates and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Mike
Mullen, have long suggested transferring funds from the Defense Department to State Department. But the situation is
so dire that the State Department, at this point, could not even absorb and spend that much-needed infusion of cash. If
there were a wholesale transfer of funds tomorrow, the lack of capacity and skills at the State department would mean
it would have to give it back to the Defenk Department or dole it out to contractors.
The creeping militarization of U.S. foreign policy is itself deeply worrying, not just to Gates and Mullen, but also to such
luminaries as Secretary Clinton and Vice President Joe Biden. In 2008, then-Senator Biden questioned the ""expanding
role of the military in U.S. foreign policy."" He said he was concerned by the ""migration of functions and authorities from
U.S. civilian agencies to the Department of Defense.""
Some commentators have even wondered aloud whether the best way to fix the State Department might be to destroy
it. Foggy Bottom could retain a small core staff for its embassies and ambassadors. All other functions -- such as public
diplomacy, countering misinformation and propaganda, and development, including provincial reconstruction staffing --
could migrate to the Pentagon or become wholly independent agencies.
But atomizing the State Department would ultimately prove dangerous and further the militarization of foreign policy.
The Pentagon needs a counterbalance, a vertically integrated State Department that the president, Congress, and the
U.S. public can count on. Change, rather than creative destruction, is what Foggy Bottom needs.
Envision a State Department capable of leading whole-of-government initiatives with a strategic focus instead of one
hidebound department geared by structure and tradition to execute state-to-state diplomacy. This ""Department of State
and Non-State"" would be as deft at tackling stateless terrorist networks and hurricanes as it would be at fostering and
upholding alliances with foreign ministers. To transform Foggy Bottom in this way will require breaking the rigid
hierarchy, stovepipes, and bottlenecks which make the Pentagon look lean and dynamic in comparison.
Modern global affairs are not compartmentalized by political borders. Besides expanding the overly shallow and narrow
authorities of the public diplomacy bureau, Clinton must restructure the State Department to focus less on countries
and more on regions. Currently, each of Foggy Bottom's regional bureaus, such as Near East Affairs, is configured to
oversee its patch of embassies. Country desk officers, and most ambassadors, report to an assistant secretary, the
regional head. The assistant secretary in turn reports to an undersecretary, who reports to Clinton.
Clinton should name the regional bureau heads, currently assistant secretaries, to undersecretary status. This would
help eliminate an unnecessary bureaucratic layer and would also align the State Department with the Defense
Department (which has powerful regional commands, such as Centcom and Africom). The State Department's regional
leaders would hold an equivalent civilian rank to four-star combatant commanders like Gen. David Petraeus. These
changes would promise to improve communications, synchronize missions, and put the department on the right path for
today's requirements.
But Clinton should beware reforming the State Department too quickly from within -- her efforts could be paralyzed by a
bureaucracy in mutiny that would simply wait her out. U.S. national security would suffer and the Pentagon's growing
power would become more entrenched. Clinton will need the clear and unequivocal support of the president and more
importantly Congress, which authorizes State Department spending bills, to have a chance at success.
In a burst of activity after Barack Obama's election, Congress authorized more money and people for the
State Department and pushed for greater public diplomacy. Still more is required. The question asked over the last eight
years as the State Department abrogated its various responsibilities -- if not Defense, then who? -- will not, indeed
cannot, be answered until the department steps up to the plate and becomes effective and visible in leading and
implementing U.S. foreign policy. This will take time. But, as the saying goes, there is no time like the present. The
United States now has a Congress that supports change, secretaries of state and defense who want change, a president
whose entire election platform was built around the word ""change,"" and an American public that would be outraged at
the dysfunction if it only knew the details.
3"
3378,###
3379,"Cherie Blair
Monday, September 14, 2009 12:02 PM
H; hr15@mycingular.blackberry.net
psolisdoylE
Sheikha Mosa of Qatar
She is available to see you on 24th September either morning or afternoon? Alternatively 28th or 29th September Does
that work for you
Cherie Blair
This message has been scanned by MailController."
3380,"We'll see what comes of this, but...
Meanwhile, Amorim was in Esfahan, Iran with Mottaki yesterday.
Brazil signals recognition of Honduran election
(AP) –40 minutes ago
RIO DE JANEIRO —A top Brazilian official has signaled that Latin America's largest nation may recognize the Honduran candidate who won
last weekend's post-coup presidential election.
Dilma Rousseff is chief of staff for Brazilian President Luiz !neck) Lula da Silva. Rousseff says the Central American country's Nov. 29 election
should be considered separately from the June 28 coup that ousted ex-President Manuel Zelaya.
Previously, the government had said it would not recognize the election unless Zelaya was returned to office and allowed to serve out his term,
which ends Jan. 27.
Rousseff told Brazilian television late Friday from Germany that the coup ""is one thing"" and ""discussing the election"" another.
She says ""this new process"" — the election — ""has to be considered."""
3381,"Valenzuela, Arturo A <ValenzuelaAA@state.gov>
Saturday, December 5, 2009 3:46 PM
Re: Columbia, Brazil and Honduras
Thanks very much for contacting me-- I just got off a plane in Florida on my way to Mexico for my first visit and
consultations w Carlos Pascual. Return Wed morning.
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
On Honduras we are ok-- despite complications. We maintain a principled position (no to coup), with a realistic one
based on need to have an end game for Honduras. Our formulation that election was necessary but not sufficient —
succeeded in shifting dynamic in many other countries and pushing back on erroneous press reports alleging
administration vacillation.
B5
Best regards,
Arturo"
3382,"The below is from Karl Eikenberry, who recommends you call Karzai. Richard wrote in to second what Karl wrote.
Recommended talking points:"
3383,"I will lock in in this morning.
Lona Valmoro
Special Assistant to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
(202) 647-9071"
3384,Ok
3385,"We could reach out in the next couple of hours or alternatively early tomorrow. The Eikenberry points sent last night,
plus Holbrooke's add'n, provide a good roadmap.
Let us know how you'd like to proceed."
3386,-
3387,"Will do.
Toiv, Nora F <ToivNF@state.gov>
Tuesday, September 15, 2009 7:21 AM
H; cheryl.mills
Re: Branch Summary"
3388,"Got a readout from Rich. We still have work to do on the cables, which we'll do at our session with Eikenberry
tomorrow. The July 2011 date was a trouble spot too -- but there is no excuse for that and that got mostly sorted by the
end.
Everything else was good.
My sincere apologies for missing elements of prep today -- I had to deal with some personal stuff that unfortunately
interfered.
Rich and I have organized a session for tomorrow to nail things down with Karl."
3389,"PIR <preines B6
Tuesday, September 15, 2009 8:39 AM
Diane Reynolds; H
Re: Branch's book
I happen to have a mtg this morning with Cheryl to walk her through the book, I'll send you a summary afterwards."
3390,"Absolutely.
PIR <preines
Tuesday, September 15, 2009 8:42 AM
Diane Reynolds; H
Re: Branch's book"
3393,"Cheryl Mills <
Sunday, December 6, 2009 9:39 PM
Fwd: Charles Blow in NYT today
EF1
December 5, 2009
Op-Ed Columnist
Black in the Age of Obama
By CHARLES M. BLOW
A hundred and fifty years ago, Charles Dickens opened ""A Tale of Two Cities"" with the now-famous phrase:
""It was the best of times, it was the worst of times. ...""
Those words resonated with me recently while contemplating the impact of the Obama presidency on blacks in
America. So far, it's been mixed. Blacks are living a tale of two Americas — one of the ascension of the first
black president with the cultural capital that accrues; the other of a collapsing quality of life and amplified racial
tensions, while supporting a president who is loath to even acknowledge their pain, let alone commiserate in it.
Last year, blacks dared to dream anew, envisioning a future in which Obama's election would be the catalyst for
an era of prosperity and more racial harmony. Now that the election's afterglow has nearly faded, the hysteria of
hope is being ground against the hard stone of reality. Things have not gotten better. In many ways, they've
gotten worse.
The recession, for one, has dealt a particularly punishing and uneven hand to blacks.
A May report from the Pew Research Center found that blacks were the most likely to get higher-priced
subprime loans, leading to higher foreclosure rates. In fact, blacks have displaced Hispanics as the group with
the lowest homeownership rates.
According to the most recent jobs data, not only is the unemployment rate for blacks nearly twice that of whites,
the gap in some important demographics has widened rapidly since Obama took office. The unemployment rate
over that time for white college graduates under 24 years old grew by about 20 percent. For their black cohorts,
the rate grew by about twice that much.
And a report published last month by the Department of Agriculture found that in 2008, ""food insecurity"" for
American households had risen to record levels, with black children being the most likely to experience that
food insecurity.
Things on the racial front are just as bad.
We are now inundated with examples of overt racism on a scale to which we are unaccustomed. Any protester
with a racist poster can hijack a news cycle, while a racist image can live forever on the Internet. In fact, racially
offensive images of the first couple are so prolific online that Google now runs an apologetic ad with the results
of image searches of them.
And it's not all words and images; it's actions as well. According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's 2008
hate crimes data released last week, anti-black hate crimes rose 4 percent from 2007, while the combined hate
crimes against all other racial categories declined 11 percent. If you look at the two-year trend, which would
include Obarna's ascension as a candidate, anti-black hate crimes have risen 8 percent, while those against the
other racial groups have fallen 19 percent.
This has had a sobering effect on blacks. According to a Nov. 9 report from Gallup, last summer 23 percent of
blacks thought that race relations would get a lot better with the election of Obama. Now less than half that
percentage says that things have actually gotten a lot better.
The racial animosity that Obama's election has stirred up may have contributed to a rallying effect among
blacks. According to a Gallup report published on Nov. 24, Obama's approval rating among whites has dropped
to 39 percent, but among blacks it remains above 90 percent.
Also, this hasn't exactly been a good year for black men in the news. Plaxico Burress was locked up for
accidentally shooting off a gun in a club. Henry Louis Gates Jr. was locked up for intentionally shooting off his
mouth at his own home. And Michael Jackson died after being shot full of propofol. Chris Brown brutally beat
Rihanna. Former Representative William Jefferson was convicted. And most recently, the ""personal failings"" of
Tiger Woods portray him as an alley cat. Meanwhile, the most critically acclaimed black movie of the year,
""Precious,"" features a black man who rapes and twice impregnates his own daughter. Rooting for the president
feels like a nice counterbalance.
However, the rallying creates a conundrum for blacks: how to air anxiety without further arming Obama's
enemies. This dilemma has rendered blacks virtually voiceless on some pressing issues at a time when their
voices would have presumably held greater sway.
This means that Obama can get away with doing almost nothing to specifically address issues important to
African-Americans and instead focus on the white voters he's losing in droves. This has not gone unnoticed. In
the Nov. 9 Gallup poll, the number of blacks who felt that Obama would not go far enough in promoting efforts
to aid the black community jumped 60 percent from last summer to now.
The hard truth is that Obama needs white voters more than he needs black ones.
According to my analysis, even if every black person in America had stayed home on Election Day, Obama
would still be president. To a large degree, Obama was elected by white people, some of whom were more able
to accept him because he consciously portrayed himself as racially ambiguous.
In fact, commiserating with the blacks could prove politically problematic.
In a study to be published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences this month,
researchers asked subjects to rate images of the president to determine which ones best represented his ""true
essence."" In some of the photos, his skin had been lightened. In others, it had been darkened. The result? The
more people identified him with the ""whiter"" images, the more likely they were to have voted for him, and vice
versa.
The Age of Obama, so far at least, seems less about Obama as a black community game-changer than as a
White House gamesman. It's unclear if there will be a positive Obama Effect, but an Obama Backlash is
increasingly apparent. Meanwhile, black people are also living a tale of two actions: grin and bear it.
Forwarded message"
3394,Yes! Forthcoming
3395,Fyi
3397,"Thank you for your message. I am out of the office today with intermittent access to email.
If you need immediate assistance, please call Joanne Laszczych at 202-647-5548.
Thank you.
cdm"
3398,"Happy new year to you and Bill--and Chelsea! Congrats on the upcoming marriage. A good sign, I hope, that this year will
be better. Onward, upward. Sid"
3399,"sbwhoeop
Friday, January 1, 2010 12:27 PM
Re: Happy New Year!
And read Krugman today in nyt"
3400,Got it. It's on my list to track down today.
3401,"Great - let's do 730 your time.
XO"
3402,"Krugman, in case you haven't seen:
January 1, 2010
Op-Ed Columnist
Chinese New Year
By PAUL KRUGMAN
It's the season when pundits traditionally make predictions about the year ahead. Mine concerns international economics:
I predict that 2010 will be the year of China. And not in a good way.
Actually, the biggest problems with China involve climate change. But today I want to focus on currency policy.
China has become a major financial and trade power. But it doesn't act like other big economies. Instead, it follows a
mercantilist policy, keeping its trade surplus artificially high. And in today's depressed world, that policy is, to put it bluntly,
predatory.
Here's how it works: Unlike the dollar, the euro or the yen, whose values fluctuate freely, China's currency is pegged by
official policy at about 6.8 yuan to the dollar. At this exchange rate, Chinese manufacturing has a large cost advantage
over its rivals, leading to huge trade surpluses.
Under normal circumstances, the inflow of dollars from those surpluses would push up the value of China's currency,
unless it was offset by private investors heading the other way. And private investors are trying to get into China, not out
of it. But China's government restricts capital inflows, even as it buys up dollars and parks them abroad, adding to a $2
trillion-plus hoard of foreign exchange reserves.
This policy is good for China's export-oriented state-industrial complex, not so good for Chinese consumers. But what
about the rest of us?
In the past, China's accumulation of foreign reserves, many of which were invested in American bonds, was arguably
doing us a favor by keeping interest rates low — although what we did with those low interest rates was mainly to inflate a
housing bubble. But right now the world is awash in cheap money, looking for someplace to go. Short-term interest rates
are close to zero; long-term interest rates are higher, but only because investors expect the zero-rate policy to end some
day. China's bond purchases make little or no difference.
Meanwhile, that trade surplus drains much-needed demand away from a depressed world economy. My back-of-the-
envelope calculations suggest that for the next couple of years Chinese mercantilism may end up reducing U.S.
employment by around 1.4 million jobs.
The Chinese refuse to acknowledge the problem. Recently Wen Jiabao, the prime minister, dismissed foreign complaints:
""On one hand, you are asking for the yuan to appreciate, and on the other hand, you are taking all kinds of protectionist
measures."" Indeed: other countries are taking (modest) protectionist measures precisely because China refuses to let its
currency rise. And more such measures are entirely appropriate.
Or are they? I usually hear two reasons for not confronting China over its policies. Neither holds water.
First, there's the claim that we can't confront the Chinese because they would wreak havoc with the U.S. economy by
dumping their hoard of dollars. This is all wrong, and not just because in so doing the Chinese would inflict large losses on
themselves. The larger point is that the same forces that make Chinese mercantilism so damaging right now also mean
that China has little or no financial leverage.
Again, right now the world is awash in cheap money. So if China were to start selling dollars, there's no reason to think it
would significantly raise U.S. interest rates. It would probably weaken the dollar against other currencies — but that would
be good, not bad, for U.S. competitiveness and employment. So if the Chinese do dump dollars, we should send them a
thank-you note."
3403,"Is at 7pm in the Jockey Club of the Fairfax Hotel
2100 Massachusetts Avenue Northwest"
3404,"Jack is having 7pm dinner at fairfax hotel with eikenberry and petreaus which is right down the street from u on mass
avenue. Monica can make make sure u get in ok if u want to go."
3405,"Thank you for such a lovely note. Life
seems very sweet indeed this New Year's Day, and all the more so with the privilege of doing meaningful and important
work with a great team of people and a leader whom I am proud to serve. It has been quite a journey indeed, one that
has been hard at times, but immensely rewarding. Happy New Year, and here's to a great 2010.
AM"
3406,Lauren can meet you there if you decide to go.
3407,"As I mentioned, you will be receiving a binder of NPR documents tonight. I mischaracterized the structure of the
binder. The cover note is merely an extended table of contents, and behind it are six 2- or 3-pagers on the six major
questions on which they seek your guidance. The papers are technical, and some are easier to read than others, but it is
worth a quick scan tonight before they march through them tomorrow."
3408,Okay- I just left. Lew and patraeus are both there.
3410,"Good question. Strobe will know the answer on good sounding boards. I know that he spends a fair amount of time
with nonpro/arms control types of all stripes. I will check in with him."
3411,"jpg
The new year is bound to bring in a continuing wave of crisis around the world. Consider this photo a
momentary respite. It is evocative of the good feeling you engender everywhere. The photo is of the Director
of New Life Center in Chiang Mai. They are doing incredible work there and have made exceptional progress
since your visit. They remember you with great gratitude. I had one of your signed photos left after
distributing the others to the Burmese women human rights leaders (who also felt that you were on their
side).
Everywhere I went over the holidays, there was much favorable comment about your leadership. I'm so proud
to be back working with you. Because you've created such ripples of hope, we've got so much to do!
Love to all the Clintons and best wishes for a healthy, happy, productive and rewarding New Year.
<<New Life Center Foundation 2009.jpg»"
3412,"Madame Secretary —
Many thanks for taking the time to meet the family today. They were thrilled to meet you (and I enjoyed the
break from the Ukrainians...)
Best,
Phil"
3414,"Thank you and a very happy new year to you both!
Will make sure to add to the calendar."
3416,Ok
3417,"I am out of the office, back on November 30."
3418,"8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:15 am VVEEICLY MEETING w/REGIONAL BUREAU SECRETARIES
10:00 am Deputy Secretary's Conference Room
10:00 am PRIVATE MEETING w/ BRADY WILLIAMSON
10:15 am Secretary's Office
10:30 am BILATERAL w/CROATIAN FOREIGN MINISTER GORDAN
11:00 am JANDROKOVIC Secy's Conf. Room *Official photo in East Hall preceding.
11:00 am USG PRESS PRE-BRIEF
11:05 am Secretary's Office
11:05 am JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/CROATIAN FOREIGN
11:15 am MINISTER GORDAN JANDROKOVIC Treaty Room
11:30 am PHONE CALL w/ BRAZILIAN FM CELSO AMORIM
11:40 am Secretary's Office
11:40 am OFFICE TIME
12:30 pm Secretary's Office
12:30 pm PHONE CALL w/ MALAYSIAN FM ANIFAH AMAN
12:40 pm Secretary's office
12:40 am OFFICE TIME
1:15 pm Secretary's Office
1:15 pm VIDEO CONFERENCE TO THE ELEANOR ROOSEVELT
1:45 pm LIFETIME ACHIEVEMENT AWARD IN HUMAN RIGHTS
Principals Conference Room 7516
2:00 pm DEPARTMENT OF STATE'S ANNUAL RETIREMENT
3:00 pm (t) CEREMONY Dean Acheson Auditorium, First Floor
3:00 pm PRESS TIME
3:30 pm 8"" Floor or Marshall Room
4:00 pm PRIVATE MEETING w/ JOE DIMENTO
4:10 pm Secretary's Office
4:15 pm OFFICE TIME
6:45 pm Secretary's Office
6:45 pm (t) HOLIDAY RECEPTION FOR MEMBERS OF THE PRESS
7:15 pm (t) Jefferson and Adams Rooms, eFloor
7:20 pm DEPART State Department *En route Private Residence
7:30 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
3419,"There are a number of different possibilities for how the decision on the Guinea/Madagascar credentials may go
tomorrow. (It is Zambia and Tanzania bringing the challenge on behalf of the AU.) I was under the impression that we
would not have to vote on the potential credentials challenges. We may have to.
We may have to vote on a motion to *deny* them credentials and exclude them. For the moment, the guidance is to
vote to credential all countries — including these two — as is customary, while conducting outreach with Tanzania,
Zambia, and the AU to exnlain that WP have our own imnpratives hut ma cunnnrt thp fart that they are taking a
principled stand.
We may have to vote on a motion to *defer* decision, which would allow them to be seated and vote but would not
formally grant credentials. For the moment, the guidance is to potentially support such a motion — this was the practice
with respect to South Africa between 1983 and 1994. Everyone is in the same place on this.
Ultimately, however, the whole thing may die of its own weight. This is probably the most likely outcome."
3420,"Importance: High
ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE/ATTORNEY WORK-PRODUCT
And Happy New Year to you (and your family) too! I am so thrilled to be in this job and working with you. I am having a
great time, and hope to have an even better 2010.
Re Blackwater. I have already put these very questions to our team, and they are working up a memo on the subject.
Significantly, the press accounts are all saying that State Department lawyers appropriately warned the DOJ prosecutors,
but that the DOJ lawyers chose to take a different route.
My initial reactions to your questions are as follows:
I will keep pressing and give you an oral report at Monday's 8:45, and we can get the promised memo to you soon
thereafter.
Please let me know if you need more.
Best
Harold
For"
3421,"B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Yes. (Sorry for late response -- been driving in Thanksgiving traffic to Ohio.)
Jeffrey Feltman"
3422,"December 15, 2009
For: Hillary"
3423,"ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE/ATTORNEY WORK-PRODUCT
Ok. Will do."
3424,"Cover story in the Economist this week. Very big issue when I was in Japan and Korea. Korean parliamentarians want to
get women and economic growth on the G20 agenda when they have the lead next year and we are advocating for Japan
to advance the issue at APEC which they are leading this year.
On another note, so sad about Smith Bagley. He was a good person and was one of your biggest fans.
Women and work
We did it!
Dec 30th 2009
From The Economist print edition
The rich world's quiet revolution: women are
gradually taking over the workplace
Getty Images
AT A time when the world is short of causes for celebration, here is a candidate:
within the next few months women will cross the 50% threshold and become the
majority of the American workforce. Women already make up the majority of
university graduates in the OECD countries and the majority of professional
workers in several rich countries, including the United States. Women run many
of the world's great companies, from PepsiCo in America to Areva in France.
Women's economic empowerment is arguably the biggest social change of our
times. Just a generation ago, women were largely confined to repetitive, menial
jobs. They were routinely subjected to casual sexism and were expected to
abandon their careers when they married and had children. Today they are
running some of the organisations that once treated them as second-class
citizens. Millions of women have been given more control over their own lives.
And millions of brains have been put to more productive use. Societies that try to
resist this trend—most notably the Arab countries, but also Japan and some
southern European countries—will pay a heavy price in the form of wasted talent
and frustrated citizens.
This revolution has been achieved with only a modicum of friction (see article).
Men have, by and large, welcomed women's invasion of the workplace. Yet even
the most positive changes can be incomplete or unsatisfactory. This particular
advance comes with two stings. The first is that women are still under-
represented at the top of companies. Only 2% of the bosses of America's largest
companies and 5% of their peers in Britain are women. They are also paid
significantly less than men on average. The second is that juggling work and
child-rearing is difficult. Middle-class couples routinely complain that they have
too little time for their children. But the biggest losers are poor children—
particularly in places like America and Britain that have combined high levels of
female participation in the labour force with a reluctance to spend public money
on child care.
Dealing with the juggle
These two problems are closely related. Many women feel they have to choose
between their children and their careers. Women who prosper in high-pressure
companies during their 20s drop out in dramatic numbers in their 30s and then
find it almost impossible to regain their earlier momentum. Less-skilled women
are trapped in poorly paid jobs with hand-to-mouth child-care arrangements.
Motherhood, not sexism, is the issue: in America, childless women earn almost as
much as men, but mothers earn significantly less. And those mothers' relative
poverty also disadvantages their children.
Demand for female brains is helping to alleviate some of these problems. Even if
some of the new theories about warm-hearted women making inherently superior
workers are bunk (see article), several trends favour the more educated sex,
including the ""war for talent"" and the growing flexibility of the workplace. Law
firms, consultancies and banks are rethinking their ""up or out"" promotion systems
because they are losing so many able women. More than 90% of companies in
Germany and Sweden allow flexible working. And new technology is making it
easier to redesign work in all sorts of family-friendly ways.
Women have certainly performed better over the past decade than men. In the
European Union women have filled 6m of the 8m new jobs created since 2000. In
America three out of four people thrown out of work since the ""mancession""
began have been male. And the shift towards women is likely to continue: by
2011 there will be 2.6m more female than male university students in America.
The light hand of the state
All this argues, mostly, for letting the market do the work. That has not stopped
calls for hefty state intervention of the Scandinavian sort. Norway has used
threats of quotas to dramatic effect. Some 40% of the legislators there are
women. All the Scandinavian countries provide plenty of state-financed nurseries.
They have the highest levels of female employment in the world and far fewer of
the social problems that plague Britain and America. Surely, comes the argument,
there is a way to speed up the revolution—and improve the tough lives of many
working women and their children?
If that means massive intervention, in the shape of affirmative-action
programmes and across-the-board benefits for parents of all sorts, the answer is
no. To begin with, promoting people on the basis of their sex is illiberal and
unfair, and stigmatises its beneficiaries. And there are practical problems. Lengthy
periods of paid maternity leave can put firms off hiring women, which helps
explain why most Swedish women work in the public sector and Sweden has a
lower proportion of women in management than America does.
But there are plenty of cheaper, subtler ways in which governments can make life
easier for women. Welfare states were designed when most women stayed at
home. They need to change the way they operate. German schools, for instance,
close at midday. American schools shut down for two months in the summer.
These things can be changed without huge cost. Some popular American charter
schools now offer longer school days and shorter summer holidays. And, without
going to Scandinavian lengths, America could invest more in its children: it
spends a lower share of its GDP on public child-care than almost any other rich
country, and is the only rich country that refuses to provide mothers with paid
maternity leave. Barack Obama needs to measure up to his campaign rhetoric
about ""real family values"".
Still, these nagging problems should not overshadow the dramatic progress that
women have made in recent decades. During the second world war, when
America's menfolk were off at the front, the government had to summon up the
image of Rosie the Riveter, with her flexed muscle and ""We Can Do It"" slogan, to
encourage women into the workforce. Today women are marching into the
workplace in ever larger numbers and taking a sledgehammer to the remaining
glass ceilings."
3425,"sbwhoeop
Sunday, January 3, 2010 10:01 AM
H: They asked for 250 words and I wrote slightly more, briefly on China. Sid
2010: global cracks, human prospects (part II)
No•
a■iid Hayes, 2 January 2010
Subjects:
• Democracy and government
• International politics
More openDemocracy authors reflect on a volcanic decade in global politics - continued from part I
openDemocracy deputy editor David Hayes asked openDemocracy writers to reflect on the decade that has passed and
the one that lies ahead by considering three questions:
1)What was the most significant trend in the century's first decade?
2) What do you most hope for, and most fear, about the decade to come?
3) What idea do you see fading and/or emerging in 2010 and beyond?
• Sidney Blumenthal
The greatest challenge for the early 21st century is that China's leadership has contempt for much of the international
order and many of the international organisations developed since the second world war. In pursuit of its narrow and even
crude understanding of its interest, China will constantly abuse and break international rules, protocols and bodies. Its
willful destruction of the Copenhagen summit on climate change reveals the pattern. Its mercantile currency policy in a
beggar-thy-neighbour approach, environmental degradation, and disdain for human rights and the rule of law generally
are the obvious reflections of its despotism. Through its rough and strange neo-imperialism, in Africa especially but also
elsewhere, China is able to gain help, partly through economic intimidation, in its international forays to repel or strike
down the responsibilities of internationalism.
Internally, China is a prison of nations, an empire similar to imperial Russia and the Soviet Union, and may also be the
most unequal industrial country in distribution of income. China's power is increasing, but the authoritarian regime is
hardly the wave of the future as some awestruck worshippers of raw power and money (whether investment bankers or
ex-Marxists) imagine. The system is inherently unstable, which accounts for its rigid currency policy (at root a fear of
operating on other than a virtual slave-labour standard, of turning its poverty-stricken millions into consumers with real
choice, and ultimately of letting go even a little bit).
In the long-term the tyranny of the one-party state and its military rule is at odds with the new economic classes of
entrepreneurs and professionals it has fostered. China's growing economic power is accompanied by expanding
arrogance, demonstrated not least in the incivility and rudeness with which President Obama was treated on his trip there.
China's regime lacks an ideal other than a communist gloss on Confucian uniformity, itself based incoherently on reckless
economic development, for example in the areas of currency, environment and labour; it has no ""soft power"", not just
because of the coarseness of its supposed diplomacy, but also because its cultural appeal does not travel. China forces
its way through coercion of one sort or another.
The next decade will see how flexible or inflexible its rulers are and how secure their system is. The brief effort at a
rhetorical gesture by some in the Obama administration who floated the turgid phrase ""strategic reassurance"" was risible
and did not last. For now, the west has no policy to deal with China as it is. The place to begin is on currency.
The most powerful idea for the 21st century is the equality of women. It is the idea most feared by those - from the Vatican
to the Taliban - arrayed against modernity, the still vibrant project of the Enlightenment. Someday the United States may
even have a woman president. It took fifty years after granting the vote to African-Americans to pass a constitutional
amendment giving it to women. Perhaps the distance between electing the first African-American president and the first
female one will not be so great.
Sidney Blumenthal is former senior adviser to President Clinton, and an Oscar and Emmy award-winning documentary
producer. He is writing a book on Abraham Lincoln
Also by Sidney Blumenthal:
""The choice"" (21 November 2007)"
3426,FYI
3427,"We'll have the specials summarize the key points of the memcons and circulate them to RCH and senior NSC folks, if that
works for you."
3428,Here it is -- came in overnight. Huma will have copy for you this morning.
3429,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 17, 2010 10:09 AM
H
FW: URGENT: Friends of Haiti Teleconference
Copying you as heads up for your 1pm call only —not for decision.
cdm
From Abedin, Huma
Sent: Sunday, January 17, 2010 10:00 AM
To: Jacobson, Roberta S; S_SpecialAssistants; Valmoro, Lona J; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Reynoso, Julissa; Kelly, Craig A; Valenzuela, Arturo A; Gonzalez, Juan S
Subject: Re: URGENT: Friends of Haiti Teleconference
Cheryl needs to address"
3431,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 17, 2010 10:56 AM
H
Fw: Rep. Meek is Haiti - details"
3432,Will do on both counts.
3433,We are meeting with you at noon to discuss.
3434,I have asked about the abstention possibility and they are looking into the mechanics.
3435,Ok
3436,Sounds good.
3437,Fyi
3438,"8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:20 am REMARKS TO THE DIPLOMACY CONFERENCE ON LATIN
9:50 am AMERICA Marshall Auditorium
10:00am PHONE CALL w/FRENCH FM BERNARD KOUCHNER
10:15am Secretary's Office
10:15 am PHONE CALL w/DR. HENRY KISSINGER
10:30 am Secretary's Office
10:30 am SPEECH PREP TIME
11:30 am Secretary's Office
11:30 am WEEKLY MEETING w/UN AMBASSADOR SUSAN RICE
12:00 pm Secretary's Office
12:00 pm PRE-BRIEF FOR KISSINGER INTERVIEW
12:30 pm Secretary's Office (Jake, PJ and Philippe)
12:30 pm PRIVATE MEETING w/ Joe Wilson
12:50 pm Secretary's Office
1:00 pm HOLIDAY RECEPTION FOR NEA AND WHA
2:00 pm Benjamin Franklin Room, 8' Floor *Approx. 300 ppl expected.
2:05 pm DEPART State Department *En route Andrews AFB
2:30 pm ARRIVE Andrews AFB
2:35 pm DEPART En route New York-LaGuardia Airport
3:25 pm ARRIVE New York, New York-LaGuardia Airport
Contact: FBO SheltAir Office 718-779-4040
3:30 pm DEPART LaGuardia Airport *En route OTR
4:30 pm OTR
5:30 pm Location: Tbd
5:30 pm DEPART OTR *En route Park Avenue
6:00 pm ARRIVE Park Avenue
6:00 pm NEWSWEEK INTERVIEW w/DR. HENRY KISSINGER
7:00 pm Dr. Kissinger's Office, 350 Park Avenue (between 51't and 52n1 Streets)
7:05 pm DEPART Park Avenue *En route Cipriani's
7:25 pm ARRIVE Cipriani's
7:30 pm KEYNOTE ADDRESS TO THE AMERICAN PAKISTAN
8:30 pm FOUNDATION'S INAUGURAL GALA Cipriani's at 42nd Street
8:35 pm DEPART Cipriani's *En route Private Residence"
3439,This is what you should have lust gotten
3440,"Tamera, we are so excited you are keeping tradition this year!"
3441,Fyi - background for call sheet you will get
3442,Marina told me she left. I'm faxing to secret service. Dan will make sure u get it
3443,"If you want us to send a hard-copy note, we can do that too. Betsy is concerned you might have the wrong e-mail
address for him."
3444,"I'm checking with one person, but no further Intel on my end yet
But don't think Mark's writing, just fishing - unless the WH gave it to the Times, but there's no way they'd handle you
that way
Let me confirm that point, which is important to know"
3445,"Landler has called me twice -- I haven't called back because I don't want to go down the road.
I talked to Matt and off-handedly asked about the issue -- he said that people are deeply unhappy with our friend, but
not much else. Said he didn't think anything was imminent. But it was not a very optimistic conversation."
3447,"They are trying to report this out, but not writing imminently"
3448,"I went back upstairs with Dr Kissinger and we talked about it. I regret the seating, it just begged Meacham to interview
you, to ask a question, then alternate answering. Was just a very different dynamic than you two before the sitdown. It
would be bad TV. But it's print.
So as an observer, and I think this will come across to the reader, it was a fascinating meeting of two eras that are very
different but very the same. Two very different people, but the same job, experiencing it much the same way. His spiel
at the end about the goal should be more than ending the war will translate well.
And most importantly, the photos look great
He was also a sport and called my friend and talked for 10 mins about non-proliferation"
3449,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, January 17, 2010 12:53 PM
H
1pm call manifest
We now have confirmed participation by Brazil/Amorim; France/Kouchner; Haiti/PM; Chile, Uruguay, Peru at ministerial
level; Argentina, Mexico, and Costa Rica at Vice Min level. UN has committed to high-level participation as well,"
3450,"There are a few things I sent to oscar to print:
- revised AfPak strategy overview memo that came from holbrookes office.
- prep paper from rich for testimony next week.
-a draft copy of the action memo and report on Kerry-Lugar-Berman that Jake wanted you to see this weekend. the
final package will be in dc Sunday night. The report is due to Congress on Monday."
3451,FYI
3452,Yes will do.
3453,"Contacting with wha now. Frattini would have to cancel his trip so we would have to re-schedule for another date or just
do in context of one of these multilateral meetings. He has a big speech in italy on the 26th."
3454,Give me a few minutes
3455,"Importance:
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Sunday, January 3, 2010 1:53 PM
Abedin, Huma
FW: 2009-12-31 Lewis Work Plan
2009-12-31 Lewis Department Notice.docx; 2009-12-31 Lewis Work Plan.docx
High
HRC:
Per our conversation, she advised I could forward this — it will also come through channels.
cdm"
3456,"III confirm if he'll be there for london.
As for paris, looks like sarkozy will be there but we won't know for sure till tomorrow. So it would mean sarkozy meeting,
speech and kouchner around 6pm when he's back from davos."
3457,Checking.
3458,"Hi,
Attached is a new draft in which I have tried to pack in the changes/additions you requested yesterday (as well
as Cheryl's and Lissa's suggested edits).
To use a metaphor (or rather simile) of the season, we are at the stage where it's a bit like decorating a
Christmas tree: trying to hang the ornaments so no branch bends too much, and so the whole tree stays upright.
I wanted to get it to you first, but will circulate to the others now, and can send to Oscar if that's helpful in terms
of getting you a hard copy.
Dan"
3460,I am on official travel until sometime on December 18. I will have periodic access to e-mails on this system.
3462,"Will happily do. The French Legal adviser Edwidge Belliard was very excited to meet you at lunch in DC a few months ago
and I just saw her in the Hague on Wed. So Jeff--will stand by for your instructions Harold Harold Hongju Koh The Legal
Adviser U.S. Department of State Suite 6421
2201 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20520-6421
202 647 9598 office
202 647 7096 fax"
3463,Got it -- will follow up. Has Tom been in touch? Matt said he would be this morning.
3464,Yes will do.
3465,"Feltman, Jeffrey D <FeltmanJD©state.gov>
Saturday, December 12, 2009 11:29 AM
H; Koh, Harold Hongju
Re: Guinea
I have left a message on the phone number of my French counterpart. I am sure he'll call me back, as he always does.
Jeffrey Feltman"
3466,"Harold, we told the Moroccans they have a couple of options.
Other ideas welcome!
Jeffrey Feltman"
3467,That sounds like a good menu. We are seeing if there are other options and will get back to you
3468,"I. Introduction
The next six months will be a critical time for establishing the Department's leadership in
bridging relationships for U.S. intergovernmental officials and their foreign counterparts,
defining the mission and role of the Office of the Special Representative for Global
Intergovernmental Affairs (""S/SRGIA""), and outlining an agenda that serves the needs of the
Department and these officials. Our approach will be strategic and integrated, working in
collaboration with Department bureaus and USAID offices to strengthen and deliver on the
Secretary's and Administration's priorities.
II. Key Objectives
The Special Representative for Global Intergovernmental Affairs will serve the global
needs of the U.S. intergovernmental officials and the entities they represent. The S/SRGIA will
also connect U.S. state and local officials with intergovernmental officials around the world,
promote local capacity building investments and programs to enhance country-led processes, and
facilitate the needs and goals of intergovernmental officials here and abroad consistent with
Department priorities.
III. Next Steps
This work plan describes activities that the S/SRGIA plans to initiate, grow and
implement in the next six months. To place the Work Plan in context, we describe below
S/SRGIA' s work-planning process.
A. Establish S/SRGIA Mission and Role in the Department.
Currently, no one and no office in the State Department has accountability to serve the
needs of intergovernmental officials, (e.g., Governors, Mayors, local elected leaders, the entities
that represent them) with respect to their global affairs portfolios. State and local officials'
concerns are typically routed on an individual basis through bureaus with the results reflecting ,
the priority of the person in the bureau's estimation or the nature of the request. Priority
activities will be as follows:
1
Sensitive But Unclassified
• Confirm the Secretary's support to focus on priority issues and countries;
• Join Department's meetings and conversations with visiting foreign state and local
representatives and dignitaries to establish S/SRGIA's role;
• Strengthen support on global intergovernmental affairs issues internally in the State
Department, by explaining the value of these stakeholders;
• Track deployment of resources assisting intergovernmental officials and leverage the
State Department's collective U.S. and global intergovernmental relationships;
• Follow and interpret international issues (e.g., food security, global health, climate
change, trade and economic development, energy) of importance to state governments;
• Promote dialogue between the Department (e.g., USAID, EEB, ECA, Public Private
Partnerships, Global Women's Issues, Consular Affairs, MCC and targeted Regional
Bureaus) and external constituents (e.g., Governors, Mayors, local elected officials, and
the entities that they represent) for more effective partnerships and relationships; and
• Collaborate with the Public Diplomacy and INR to create a survey of foreign
intergovernmental affairs officials to determine their needs and engage U.S.
intergovernmental officials to learn how the Department should help to further their
global goals.
B. Conduct Stakeholder Outreach: Obtain first-hand understanding of the needs of
U.S. intergovernmental officials.
State economies are increasingly globalized, and more and more U.S. companies are
competing in international markets and against firms worldwide. As the principal stewards of
their states' economic success, Governors recognize that the global marketplace presents both
challenges and opportunities and that states must address both to ensure their continued
competitiveness. Thus, S/SRGIA will develop its global intergovernmental affairs outreach
activities in partnership with its participating US and other intergovernmental and international
organizations. U.S. national organizations who serve governmental authorities include but are
not limited to the following:
• National Governors Association;
• National Lt. Governors Association;
• U.S. Conference of Mayors;
• National League of Cities;
• National Association of Counties/Large Urban County Caucus;
• National Association of States Attorney Generals;
• National State Legislatures; and
• Councils of State Governments.
Outreach is essential to many aspects of the Department's activities. S/SRGIA's outreach
objective is to promote and increase the general awareness of the benefits of the State
Department efforts in global intergovernmental affairs, especially among decision makers and
policy makers, educational entities, non-governmental organizations, public-interest groups and
public agencies. S/SRGIA will provide international outreach services to state and local elected
officials in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and all other inhabited U.S.
territories. Specific objectives are to:
2
Sensitive But Unclassified
• Build state by state profiles, thus creating a set of priorities and identifying opportunities
for collaboration with state and local officials on their global projects and Department
priorities;
• Establish our target list of public officials to assist and nurture relationships with
principals and the organizations that represent them and their global needs;
• Create dialogue with the Governors and Mayors in preparation for the NGA and Mayors
Washington conferences in the fall;
• Travel to conferences and meetings within the United States and countries abroad
required to implement the Department's global intergovernmental affairs agenda;
• Develop a network of leaders, to collaborate and create partnerships;
• Coordinate meetings between Department of State experts and state and local officials;
• Support targeted elected officials trade missions and other official trips abroad;
• Develop a strategy for deliverables such as multilateral pacts and Memorandum of
Understandings on key State Department priorities that we will sign with responsible
parties; and
• Collaboration with EEB, to partner with them to engage state and local government
leaders in the bureaus enhanced commercial diplomacy efforts (e.g. the Administration's
National Export Initiative and EEB/Consular Affairs Business Visa Facilitation initiative,
etc.).
C. Conduct Stakeholder Outreach: Obtain first-hand understanding of the needs of
middle and senior foreign intergovernmental affairs officials.
Currently, ECA conducts a significant number of exchanges with foreign and
domestic government officials. None of ECA's programs target regions with the
objective of enhancing another country's government systems because the bureau's
authorities do not permit any type of training since everything must be done under the
auspices of enhancing mutual understanding. The most visible ECA program is the
International Visitor Leadership Program which in FY09 brought in 1,390 foreign
government officials at the state, city and national levels to gain knowledge around the
US political system and culture. To date, the bureau estimates the same number of
government visitors in FY10.
Thus, S/SRGIA will develop its global intergovernmental affairs outreach activities in
partnership with international organizations. International organizations who serve local
governmental authorities include but are not limited to the following:
• United Cities and Local Governments;
• Metropolis;
• The World Urban Forum;
• UN-HABITAT;
• Latin American and Caribbean Ministers of Housing and Urbanization;
• UN Advisory Committee of Local Authorities;
• The World Mayors Council on Climate Change;
3
Sensitive But Unclassified
• Sister Cities International;
• Local Governments for Sustainability; and
• Municipal Development Partnerships which targets governments in Africa.
Priority activities will be as follows:
• S/SRGIA will collaborate with Public Diplomacy to conduct stakeholder outreach
with strategic countries — e.g. Af, Pak, Iraq — and key emerging powers (Brazil,
India, Indonesia, South Africa, Nigeria) and developing countries (Rwanda,
Ethiopia, Kenya, etc.) to obtain first-hand understanding of the needs of middle
and senior foreign intergovernmental affairs officials;
• Collaborate with [NR to assist us in gaining a better understanding of what
foreign intergovernmental affairs officials want to engage with their US
counterparts ranging from engagement on a host of common policy concerns,
opportunities, programs and connections.
D. Provide Leadership for Department Intergovernmental Capacity Building.
One of our largest challenges in most developing countries is the lack of capacity in the
government below the President and Prime Minister level. As the Department seeks to
implement development programs or conduct diplomacy, there is often limited local counterpart
capacity to do so with or to empower. S/SRGIA will work with USAID and State bureaus and
offices to provide connections and leadership development to build the capacity of
intergovernmental officials in countries around the world. Currently, millions of dollars of
USAID and ECA grants that support capacity building are typically carried out by contractors
and have results that are not transparent in their reporting or impact. S/SRGIA will partner with
existing offices to provide leadership for the investment in this space, accountability for the
outcomes and programming, and foster relationships between intergovernmental officials here in
the US with foreign partners to mentor and model what is needed.
S/SRGIA capacity building strategies will primarily be based on best practices derived
from studying successful and less-successful approaches. Within the next six months, S/SRGIA
will work in partnership with Department and USAID bureaus and resources. Priority activities
will be as follows:
• Identify State Department investments, canvass additional State Department dedicated
resources other than grant-making and assess the strength of the current environment
needed to advance the S/SRGIA's Secretary capacity building agenda for state and local
leaders; participate in QDDR process regarding this agenda;
• Develop an agenda for a high-level retreat on the formulation of a National Capacity
Development Strategy to present achievements to date, lessons learned and proposals for
institutional capacity development going forward;
• Work with the Chiefs of Missions and other diplomats in countries where capacity
building is critical to the success of our diplomacy and development efforts;
4
Sensitive But Unclassified
• Amplify and sustain high quality and results driven support to institutional capacity
development by assisting in advocating for increased funding and building public-private
partnerships;
• Prioritize discrete initiatives to ""fast track"", based on importance, regional priorities (e.g.,
Asia, Africa and Latin America), assessment of readiness, impact and feasibility and
translate priorities into actionable interventions;
• Develop a network of experts involved in existing capacity-building initiatives related to
global intergovernmental affairs and build partnerships;
• Define a coordinated approach and institutional responsibilities for supporting the GIA
capacity building initiative; and
• Identify opportunities for further collaboration with state and local officials on their
projects and Department priorities.
IV. Administrative Activities
• Standardize requests for assistance with projects related to policy, business, trade,
consular affairs, etc.; and
• Link the Department website to states websites and trade and development office
websites.
V. Budget and Staffing
S/SRGIA will require a budget and staffing to fulfill its mission.
VI. Assessment of Progress
The short term goal will be to engage U.S. intergovernmental officials about their global
concerns. The S/SRGIA office will become a significant resource for high-level State
Department engagement for U.S. state and local elected officials. The benefits of this new office
will be immediate and grow over time as our engagement deepens. Assisting US states and local
governments to expand their exports, promote locations for foreign investment and for
participation in State Department priorities are some of the short term benefits we hope to
achieve with respect to U.S. intergovernmental officials.
With respect to the global intergovernmental officials, in the short term, we expect to
work with our Regional Bureaus and Offices, (e.g., USAID, ECA, EEB, etc.) to assess the
current state of play and assist us with how we better target and leverage our assistance to this
constituency.
In the longer term, institutionally, we need to sustain relationships with our embassies
and missions overseas, so that they can assist state and local officials and their constituencies to
expand their global business base. As related to our national capacity building strategy, in the
long term, we seek to empower and educate and build relationships with state and local officials
abroad. We also seek accountability for the outcomes of the programming and will provide
leadership for future investments. Going forward, we will tailor these investments to address
regional State Department priorities.
5
Sensitive But Unclassified
In addition, since there is a lack of USG harmonization of all of the relevant USG
programs, having S/SRGIA be the designated coordinator will allow DOS to take the lead in
synchronizing government wide programs that engage foreign government officials. This will be
another long term goal for the office.
VII. Potential Events
A. Potential Events and Activities for S
1. Private Dinner or Luncheon with the Governors and Urban Mayors;
2. Roundtable or Speech at USCMNGA Winter Meetings; and
3. Recommendations of Governors and Mayors for S to extend possible invitations for
occasional international travel with S.
B. Potential Events and Activities SRGIA
1. Host ""Day with State"" with U.S. intergovernmental officials and conduct joint meetings
with various State Department Bureaus and Offices giving stakeholders the ability to
connect and partner with State;
2. Focus Groups with Diplomats from key regions of interest representing Latin America,
Africa, Asia in our development of our capacity building strategy;
3. Meetings with other elected officials and representative organizations;
4. Meetings with NG0s, thinktanks, etc.; and
5. Recommend US intergovernmental officials for appointments to US delegations to State
Department international meetings and conferences.
VIII. Possible Travel for SRGIA
A. Domestic
1. TX, NY, VA, MD, PA, Delaware, D.C. Illinois, Florida, California, Ohio, NJ, Michigan.
States are targeted based on foreign direct investment, export data and states of interest.
B. International
1. Travel to targeted international meetings that focus on engaging state and local leaders;
(e.g. World Urban Forum, Brazil; World Cities Summit 2010, Singapore; World Alliance
of Cities Against Poverty, Rotterdam; 3' Meeting of United Cities and Local
Governments-ASPAC Congress 2010, Japan; Global Mayors Forum, Hong Kong and
Shenzhen, China;
2. Emphasis and travel to Asia, Latin America and Africa countries where capacity building
is critical to the success of our diplomacy and development effort.
6
Sensitive But Unclassified
IX. Key Dates - 2010
1. Jan, 13 - 14, 2010, Western Hemisphere Economic Officers Conference, Puerto Rico
2. Jan. 20— Jan. 22, USCM Winter Meeting and June 2010 Annual Meeting
3. Jan. 29 — Feb. 1, National Association of Secretaries of State
4. Jan. 30 — Jan. 31, National Conference of State Legislatures, Savannah, GA
5. Feb. 8 — Feb. 10, National Association of Attorneys General, Ft. Lauderdale, FL
6. Feb. 20 — Feb. 22, National Governors Association Winter Meeting and July 2010
Annual Meeting
7. Mar. 6 — Mar. 7, National Association of Counties
8. Mar. 10 — Mar. 12, National Lieutenant Governors Association
9. International Conference of Mayors Summits
10.Strategic and Economic Dialogue — Chaired by S and Treasury
11.2010 - Gov. Linda Lingle, APEC Conference — Hawaii
12.World Conference of Mayors for Peace
13.United Nations Day
14.Mayors Hemisphere Forum
7"
3469,Thanks. I passed on to Ron as well and clarified it was to do with W Sahara.
3470,See below. Todd also wrote a short while ago to say the following:
3471,"Whoops. ..to say:
HRC should come. Danes expect all day Thursday for discussions with and among leaders to resolve open issues.
Discussed this with Danish leaders today. Think this very important. This is looking more and more difficult, so I'm
certainly not promising success. But bad if we don't try full out. Thanks pal."
3472,Readouts from all your calls r going to the relevant people.
3473,"Per the plan, a statement is being released in your name. This is the same statement you saw in the memo package
from Mitchell:
Today's announcement by the Government of Israel helps move forward toward resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We believe that through good-faith negotiations the parties can mutually agree on an outcome which ends the
conflict and reconciles the Palestinian goal of an independent and viable state based on the 1967 lines, with agreed
swaps, and the Israeli goal of a Jewish state with secure and recognized borders that reflect subsequent developments
and meet Israeli security requirements. Let me say to all the people of the region and world: our commitment to
achieving a solution with two states living side by side in peace and security is unwavering."
3474,"I just talked to the French NEA equivalent.
Jeffrey Feltman"
3476,"Madam Secretary: We are in total agreement with the French on this issue, are coordinating closely and being proactive
in our own diplomacy.
Johnnie"
3477,"I've asked Todd to identify the specific areas where he thinks progress can be made through discussions on Thursday.
At a high level, I think leaders' conversations on Thursday will begin to narrow gaps on the big issues -- transparency,
funding, inscribing commitments, etc -- IF (and it's a big if) those gaps are narrow-able. If they're not, then
Thursday/Friday will be days of trying and failing ... but at least trying.
Todd's view is that there is not enough time Friday for top-level meetings to close the deal; that two days are required.
You would be our head of delegation for the first, POTUS for the second."
3478,"Will get back to you on the specific process, but my understanding is that it will be a series of bilats and possibly some
working sessions. You can meet with leaders; harder for Todd or Chu to do so."
3479,"Netanyahu gave a press conference a few hours ago. I've seen plenty of his quotes in stories. Let me see if I can find
transcript."
3480,Will do.
3481,"Will do. Below is the formal statement that was released in the PM's name:
Today, my cabinet authorized a policy of restraint regarding settlements which will include a suspension of new permits
and new construction in Judea and Samaria for a period of ten months.
My cabinet authorized this far reaching step because of our deep desire for peace.
We hope that this decision will help launch meaningful peace negotiations to reach a historic peace agreement that will
finally end the conflict between the Palestinians and Israel.
We are committed to working closely with the United States to advance peace and security in the region.
We have been told by many friends that once Israel takes the first step towards peace, the Palestinians and the Arab
world would respond positively with steps of their own to create a virtuous cycle of goodwill.
Well, the government of Israel is taking a very big and difficult step toward peace today.
I hope that the Palestinians and the Arab world will seize this opportunity to work with us to forge a new beginning and
a new future for our children and for their children.
Since the day our government was sworn in eight months ago, we have been calling for direct negotiations with the
Palestinians.
During that time, we have taken many concrete actions to improve daily life for the Palestinians and to create a climate
in which political negotiations would have the best chance to succeed.
We have dismantled hundreds of roadblocks and checkpoints, extended the hours of operation on the Allenby Bridge
and removed bureaucratic obstacles to Palestinian economic development.
These actions have helped spur a surge, a boom, in the Palestinian economy. At the same time, the security
environment has improved thanks both to the efforts of the IDF and to the efforts of better trained PA security forces.
Now we wish to add to this improved economic and security climate meaningful political negotiations.
I have already said that we will not build new settlements and that we would not expropriate additional land for existing
settlements.
I said we would also restrain settlement activity, and that's exactly what we decided to do today.
I promised to enable normal life to continue for the three hundred thousand Israeli citizens, our brothers and sisters,
who live in Judea and Samaria.
That is why this suspension will not affect construction currently underway.
It will not include the schools, kindergartens, synagogues and public buildings necessary for the continuation of normal
life over the time period of the suspension.
Obviously, any infrastructure that may be needed to protect our national security or to safeguard the lives of our citizens
will also be provided during this time.
Regarding Jerusalem, our sovereign capital, our position is well known. We do not put any restrictions on building in our
sovereign capital.
As always, we are committed to protect freedom of worship for all faiths and to ensure equal and fair treatment for all
the city's residents, Jews and Arabs alike.
When the suspension ends, my government will revert to the policies of previous governments in relation to
construction.
I want to say clearly to the Palestinians: Now is the time to begin negotiations. Now is the time to move the peace
process forward. There is no more time to waste.
Israel has taken a far reaching step for peace. It's time for the Palestinians to do the same."
3482,"Daniel R is going to get it to him, along with your statement, highlighting what you've said about 1967."
3483,I am meeting with Raj but should be done by llam - can you talk then?
3484,"List we are reaching out to:
Saudi
Italy
Poland
Romania
Spain
France
Netherlands
Australia
Canada
Norway
Denmark
Sweden
Japan
South Korea"
3486,"I think Jake should be on the call.
Once the call is scheduled, I will get a version to you before the call that reflects the latest revisions I've
received.
Dan
On Sun, Dec 13, 2009 at 7:56 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemai1.com> wrote:
The latest draft is getting closer. And I agree w Dan that we have to be careful not to topple the tree w too
many ornaments. That said, I'd like to have a call w you (and anyone else who you think should be on) this
afternoon or evening to raise a few points. I'm copying Lona and Huma so they can help schedule it. Thanks
for all your good work."
3487,"Answers under each:
Will I receive a full notebook for approps hearings tonight?
Yes, and a draft of the testimony.
I'd like a call this afternoon or evening to go over the draft Af-Pak regional strategy. Who should be on call? It is quite
good but lacks ""milestones"" and budgets for each section.
Sounds good. Huma and I will work to set it up. The budget issue is complicated we've had several discussions about
it. It's hard to put down numbers with confidence.
Call should be with Jack, Piper, Rich, Paul Jones, and Sean Misko.
Re the required report for Kerry-Lugar, I want to be sure that the language in both our report and this one echo the
same language.
Paul, Sean, and Rich are going back over to make sure of that. Our chief method is to use framing language from the
strategy to frame the KLB report as well.
I never called Patricia Espinosa—should I?
Will check with WHA.
Also, have we rec'd a memo from Shaun Woodard for Robinson and McGuinness calls?
Huma should have this memo for you.
There will also be a PC on Af-Pak Tuesday and I want to be sure our report is ready.
Yes -- this is consistent with our timeline."
3488,I've flagged again for Jack and team. We'll work on it.
3489,"Hrc miliband called asking to talk today about climate change/copenhagen. Said he was calling many of his counterparts
today. Below are points. Oscar also has and can print. Ops can connect.
The Secretary's Call with British FM David Miliband
Climate Change Points:
COP15 Negotiation Update:"
3490,"Either works for me-- I am working through various sets of line edits right now. I can get a new draft out by
4pm-- depends on how much time you want to review before we talk.
Dan
On Sun, Dec 13, 2009 at 2:20 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Could we do at 4:30 or 6:45?"
3491,"The Obama party is called for 7:00pm too. I will find out if that means cocktails first and then sitting down to dinner,
which may mean you could do a quick drop by Tamera's on the front end."
3492,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, December 13, 2009 3:16 PM
Syrian presidents brother
You ok with this condolence cable for syrian president assad? He brother died after a long illness.
Dear Mr. President:
Sincerely yours,"
3493,"Yes - am forgetting now but a few things - will connect - nothing urgent (I think - damn I am getting old)
B6"
3494,"Yes taking shuttle with you
Was going to take train to usss party but with weather and luggage, will just meet u at Iga. All shuttles delayed 30
minutes."
3495,Can we do a 7pm speech call?
3496,"Bob, Jose, and in particular John Byerly in EEB. He did the heavy lifting on this. I'll check on who else might need a
shoutout."
3497,"Yes, all emails on this came from john byerly."
3498,Also -- Arturo and Craig say hold on Espinosa for now.
3499,"This draft, for the 7pm call, reflects HRC edits.
Dan
Daniel Baer
202-687-1403 (o)"
3501,Also -- Arturo and Craig say hold on Espinosa for now.
3502,"Call sheets will be coming on secure fax at 8am.
Here are confirmed calls:
830: Japanese FMinister Okada
845: French FMinister Kouchner
900: Polish FMinister Sikorski
915: Canadian FMinister Cannon
930: Brazilian FMinister Amorim
945: Romanian President Basescu
1000: Norwegian FM Stoere
1015: Italian FM Frattini
1030: Possible Saudi FM
1045: Dutch FMinister Verhagen
1100: Spanish FMinister Moratinos"
3504,We have given them windowns. As soon as you are done the next one will be connected.
3505,"sbwhoeor
Thursday, November 26, 2009 10:24 AM
H
New memo. Decline and fall, etc. Cheers, Sid
hrc memo western alliance 112609.docx
November 26.2009
For: Hillary"
3506,"I agree with Dan about the ornament problem. The draft needs refinement not re-working. And a call is a great idea. I
am just getting off a plane but could be available any time after 4 pm or so if that works for you."
3507,"Muscatine, Lissa <MuscatineL@state.gov>
Sunday, December 13, 2009 2:49 PM
daniel.baer
Valmoro, Lona J; Huma Abedin
Re: Speech
Either time works for me."
3508,"sbwhoeop
Thursday, November 26, 2009 10:58 AM
H
Re: New memo. Decline and fall, etc. Cheers, Sid
Have a good holiday. Very best to Bill. Talk soon."
3509,Ok. Yes ray lahood is still on.
3510,"Amazing job on the calls!
U r done after this minus romania which we won't pursue any more Saudi might be available at 12:45 and if u r ok, we
can do it then."
3511,"spring? He's going to be devastated.
I just came from Georgetown and talked to Jack et al. applied for ""early action"" —that is to be
guaranteed admittance without applying elsewhere. The decision on ""early action"" is based on grades and scores — the
most empirical measures. It is EXTREMELY difficult to be accepted EARLY at Georgetown She was deferred until the
spring — through the regular process when they will weigh all her strengths. There is never any guarantee but this is the
situation for early action.
Everyone is excited about the speech tom'w. I wish I could go but have to be here for another event at State. I've gone
back and forth with speechwriters. I know it will be terrific.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
3512,"I will fax a copy of this version to the house momentarily.
Comments / suggestions are in brackets as you requested.
FYI, a non-annotated version sent to D(S) and D(L), Burns, as well as to folks at NSC who had weighed in.
I will be back in office by 730.
Dan"
3514,Did u take your earpiece or do I need to get it?
3516,fyi
3519,fyi
3520,"See the story below. Consensus recommendation is that you call PR and MM tomorrow or Wednesday. Because we
expect them both to go to the press after they speak with you, we believe it would be best for you to keep the calls at a
very high level. Essentially:
O Two months have passed since your trip to Belfast and you're checking in;
• You're concerned about the news reports;
O You understand that there are substantive differences and frayed nerves, but you want to encourage all parties
to take positive actions and avoid unhelpful ones;
• You remain prepared to assist in any way — you are personally invested in seeing them work through to the
completion of this process;
• Declan is hard at work, but his efforts are hampered by the lack of progress and the public conflict
You would be mostly in listening mode and wouldn't engage substantively on the issues that are dividing them — parades
(Sinn Fein doesn't want to concede anything on parades without a date for devolution) and a date (DUP doesn't want to
set a date until they get progress on parades).
If you're amenable, we-can move forward and schedule the calls.
Thanks,
Jake"
3521,FYI
3522,FYI
3523,fyi
3524,"John Murtha Hospitalized:
David Rogers December 14, 2009 12:03 PM EST
With the annual Pentagon budget bill due on the House floor this week, a familiar face may be missing.Rep. John
Murtha, chairman of the House Appropriations defense panel, was hospitalized Sunday night because of abdominal
pains. The 77-year-old Pennsylvania Democrat had been feeling ill with what he thought last week was swine flu but the
hospitalization appears related to his gall bladder.""He's currently resting and doing well,"" his office said. But a major
committee hearing Murtha had planned for Tuesday on the growing U.S. military commitment in Afghanistan has been
postponed"
3525,"9:15 am MEETING w/liELGIAN FOREIGN MINISTER LETERME
9:45 am Room 34H
10:00 am
11:00 am
HAITI KEY PLAYERS MEETING
Jade Room
11:05 am DEPART Waldorf-Astoria Hotel *En route Canadian Mission
11:15 am ARRIVE Canadian Mission
11:20 am
11:30 am
11:30 am
12:00 pm
PULL-ASIDE w/SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SECRETARY-
GENERAL KM EIDE 14th Floor
FRIENDS OF AFGHANISTAN MEETING
14th Floor
12:05 pm DEPART Canadian Mission *En route Waldorf-Astoria Hotel
12:15 pm ARRIVE Waldorf-Astoria Hotel
12:20 pm
12:40 pm
PERSONAL/STAFF TIME
Private Suite
12:45 pm DEPART Waldorf-Astoria Hotel *En route Sheraton Hotel and Towers
12:55 pm ARRIVE Sheraton Hotel and Towers
1:00 pm CLINTON GLOBAL INITIATIVE CLOSING PLENARY
3:00 pm Main Ballroom
3:05 pm DEPART Sheraton Hotel and Towers *En route Waldorf-Astoria
3:15 pm ARRIVE Waldorf-Astoria Hotel
3:20 pm TAPING OF ""FACE THE NATION"" INTERVIEW w/HARRY SMITH
3:40 pm 34th Floor
3:45 pm MEETING w/CARIBBEAN FOREIGN MINISTERS
4:45 pm Jade Room
4:50 pm PRE-BRIEF MEETING
4:55 pm Outside of Room 35H
5:00 pm MEETING w/INDIAN EXTERNAL AFFAIRS MINISTER KRISHNA
5:25 pm Room 35H
5:30 pm MEETING w/AZERBAIJANI FOREIGN MINISTER MAMMADYAROV
6:00 pm Room 35H
6:05 pm DEPART Waldorf-Astoria Hotel *En route Ritz-Carlton Hotel
6:25 pm ARRIVERitz-Carlton Hotel
6:30 pm MEETING wIIRAQI PRESIDENT TALABANI
7:30 pm Meeting Room Tbd
7:35 pm DEPARTRitz-Carlton Hotel
En route Waldorf-Astoria Hotel
###"
3527,fyi
3528,FYI
3529,FYI
3531,Why not! Will call him.
3532,Sorry which building was that? The hotel?
3533,Got it.
3534,"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, September 26, 2009 9:27 PM
H
Fw: Funeral--oct 6 Texas
Fyi"
3535,"Yes, I can send within the hour."
3537,"But it was great to see Bill on such good form.
My friend from Q really enjoyed your meeting and felt it had gone we'll hope you did too Sent from my HTC Touch Pro
This message has been scanned by MailController - www.MailController.altohiway.com"
3539,Will get u full update. B6
3540,"Below is the update as of last night. But I'm trying to see what else we can do to help expedite. I talked to last
night and she said I . was in touch with 2 state department staff yesterday and was grateful for their assistance and
for constantly staying in touch.
Getting u an update from today but as of last night:
There has been very close coordination among Consular Affairs, Embassy Kathmandu
and Consulate Chengdu.
I"
3541,"Yes, I saw that. Trying to get some more info now."
3542,"Politico
Poll: Clinton approval soars
By: Eamon Javers
December 16, 2009 03:00 PM EST
A new poll of avid news watchers shows that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has a much higher
approval rating than the man she once campaigned against and now works for, President Barack
Obama.
In the poll of 800 registered voters who are self-identified ""news watchers,"" Clinton had a 75 percent
approval rating and a 21 percent disapproval rating overall. Obama, in contrast, had a 51 percent
approval and a 45 percent disapproval rating.
The Secretary of State has conducted several well-received foreign trips in recent months and has
not been as closely identified with the more contentious elements of the Administration's agenda,
including the health care fight, the federal deficit and the Wall Street bailouts. And she has not been
subjected to nearly the same media and partisan scrutiny as the president. Obama, meanwhile, has
been on national television on a daily basis tackling a wide range of difficult issues.
The poll was conducted by the nonpartisan Clarus Research Group from December 7th to the 12th,
and it asked for opinions of the top Cabinet secretaries and White House officials. Its finding on
Obama and Clinton mirrors that of earlier polls — in October, for example, a Gallup poll found that
Clinton had become more popular than the president.
Clarus president Ron Faucheux said one reason for Clinton's high poll numbers is her high approval
among Republicans — numbers he said position her well to run for president again in the future, if she
chooses. Clinton had 96 percent approval among Democrats, a healthy 57 percent approval among
Republicans, and 65 percent approval among Independents. Obama was nearly as popular among
Democrats — 93 percent — but his numbers among Republicans and Independents fell off
dramatically, at 19 percent and 33 percent respectively.
Clinton's Republican numbers are striking, given how intensely disliked she has been in the past
among GOP voters. In fact, part of Obama's appeal to Democratic primary voters in 2008 was that he
was more likely to be able to bridge the partisan divide than Clinton, who was by then a well-known
figure dating to her time as first lady in the 1990s.
""Republicans may see her as being more hawkish than other Democrats on foreign policy issues,""
said Faucheux. ""It may be a way for them to bolster that position within the administration."" Asked
about any future Clinton presidential bid, he said, ""She's in good shape now.""
The next highest-rated cabinet secretary in the survey was Defense Secretary Robert Gates, who
notched a 69 percent overall approval rate with a 78 percent approval among Democrats and 63
percent among both Republicans and independents.
""Both Clinton and Gates did well across the partisan board,"" said Faucheux. ""Everybody else did well
among Democrats but fell off among Republicans.""
Another trend spotted by the pollsters: Approval ratings inside the Beltway were higher than in the
rest of the country. ""These results show that the 'Beltway echo chamber' does not reflect the rest of
the country, even among news watchers,"" said Faucheux.
Among White House staffers and advisors, Press Secretary Robert Gibbs — who is often seen on
television — had the highest overall rating at 50 percent. Economic advisor Larry Summers had the
lowest approval, at 25 percent.
Summers and Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner — who are both closely associated with the
economy — both posted higher disapproval numbers than approval. Summers' disapproval rating was
41 percent. Geithner's disapproval rating was 45 percent, one point higher than his approval rating.
The poll also found that White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel, who is often viewed as having
sharp partisan elbows, scored much higher among Democrats, at 72 percent, than Republicans, at 13
percent.
Among other major administration officials, Vice President Joe Biden had a 50 percent approval and
41 percent disapproval rating; Attorney General Eric Holder and HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius
both posted 41 percent approval and 35 percent disapproval; Presidential Adviser David Axelrod
scored 38 percent approval and 36 percent disapproval; and National Security Adviser James Jones
had a 30 percent approval and 23 percent disapproval rating.
Nora Toiv
Office of the Secretary
202-647-8633"
3543,"sbwhoeop
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 5:48 PM
H: In case you haven't seen, but don't give yourself a grade if asked. Sid
Poll: Clinton approval
soars
By: Eamon „lavers
December 16, 2009 03:00
PM EST
A new poll of avid news watchers
shows that Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton has a much higher
approval rating than the man she
once campaigned against and now
works for, President Barack
Obama.
In the poll of 800 registered voters
who are self-identified ""news
watchers,"" Clinton had a 75 percent
approval rating and a 21 percent
disapproval rating overall. Obama,
in contrast, had a 51 percent
approval and a 45 percent
disapproval rating.
The Secretary of State has
conducted several well-received
foreign trips in recent months and
has not been as closely identified
with the more contentious elements
of the Administration's agenda,
including the health care fight, the
federal deficit and the Wall Street
bailouts. And she has not been
subjected to nearly the same media
and partisan scrutiny as the
president. Obama, meanwhile, has
been on national television on a _
daily basis tackling a wide range of
difficult issues.
The poll was conducted by the
nonpartisan Clarus Research
Group from December 7th to the
12th, and it asked for opinions of
the top Cabinet secretaries and
White House officials. Its finding on
Obama and Clinton mirrors that of
earlier polls — in October, for
example, a Gallup poll found that
Clinton had become more popular
than the president.
Clarus president Ron Faucheux
said one reason for Clinton's high
poll numbers is her high approval
among Republicans — numbers he
said position her well to run for
president again in the future, if she
chooses. Clinton had 96 percent
approval among Democrats, a
healthy 57 percent approval among
Republicans, and 65 percent
approval among Independents.
Obama was nearly as popular
among Democrats — 93 percent —
but his numbers among
Republicans and Independents fell
off dramatically, at 19 percent and
33 percent respectively.
Clinton's Republican numbers are
striking, given how intensely
disliked she has been in the past
among GOP voters. In fact, part of
Obama's appeal to Democratic
primary voters in 2008 was that he
was more likely to be able to bridge
the partisan divide than Clinton,
who was by then a well-known
figure dating to her time as first lady
in the 1990s.
""Republicans may see her as being
more hawkish than other
Democrats on foreign policy
issues,"" said Faucheux. ""It may be
a way for them to bolster that
position within the administration.""
Asked about any future Clinton
presidential bid, he said, ""She's in
good shape now.""
The next highest-rated cabinet
secretary in the survey was
Defense Secretary Robert Gates,
who notched a 69 percent overall
approval rate with a 78 percent
approval among Democrats and 63
percent among both Republicans
and independents.
""Both Clinton and Gates did well
across the partisan board,"" said
Faucheux. ""Everybody else did well
among Democrats but fell off
among Republicans.""
Another trend spotted by the
pollsters: Approval ratings inside
the Beltway were higher than in the
rest of the country. ""These results
show that the 'Beltway echo
chamber' does not reflect the rest of
the country, even among news
watchers,"" said Faucheux.
Among White House staffers and
advisors, Press Secretary Robert
Gibbs — who is often seen on
television — had the highest overall
rating at 50 percent. Economic
advisor Larry Summers had the
lowest approval, at 25 percent.
Summers and Treasury Secretary
Timothy Geithner — who are both
closely associated with the
economy — both posted higher
disapproval numbers than approval.
Summers' disapproval rating was
41 percent. Geithner's disapproval
rating was 45 percent, one point
higher than his approval rating.
The poll also found that White
House Chief of Staff Rahm
Emanuel, who is often viewed as
having sharp partisan elbows,
scored much higher among
Democrats, at 72 percent, than
Republicans, at 13 percent.
Among other major administration
officials, Vice President Joe Biden
had a 50 percent approval and 41
percent disapproval rating; Attorney
General Eric Holder and HHS
Secretary Kathleen Sebelius both
posted 41 percent approval and 35
percent disapproval; Presidential
Adviser David Axelrod scored 38
percent approval and 36 percent
disapproval; and National Security
Adviser James Jones had a 30
percent approval and 23 percent
disapproval rating.
El-
© 2009 Capitol News
Company, LLC"
3544,"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 27, 2009 1:31 PM
H
Latest on
It is a national holiday in Nepal now, and Embassy Kathmandu is closed on Monday
and Tuesday, but they will clearly come in to help expedite the transportation of the remains back to the U.S. Post has
already alerted those involved with preparing remains to be on stand by.
We will reiterate to everyone involved the need to do everything possible to expedite the return of the remains to the
U.S., and to inform us of any obstacles. Thus far, we have not heard of any."
3546,"Lisa is coming at 7:15 tomorrow.
Will you come to nyc in time for first bilat?"
3547,"Yes at 10.
Was checking to see if I needed to make arrangements for you to do anything earlier."
3548,"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR©state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 9:48 PM
Fw: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
Hold on Tom was lifted. Thanks for making the calls. Trying to get him thru as quickly as possible before another hold
emerges."
3549,"Let me check in.
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 27, 2009 6:50 PM
H
Re: Checking in"
3550,"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 10:06 PM
Re: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
Yes, I sold my soul to George Lemieux today. I am not proud of it."
3551,"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 10:27 PM
Re: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
I suspect they would prefer more $ for Little Havana."
3553,"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 10:48 PM
Re: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
They are out for the night. No one, in any department, has been confirmed in a couple of weeks. The environment is
toxic right now. Lula Davis sueeests all our noms (about 18 of theml will an on one of the !act davc they are in caccinn
which could be next week.
Will continue pressing tomorrow. Have even
sought help from McConnell's staff and Dave Schiappa from the R floor staff. They are trying to be helpful."
3554,"I didn't - but hard to believe he did. I was pretty surprised myself when I read the piece.
Just shows you that it's near impossible to take issue with the job you're doing it, which is why the political reporters
have to resort to the manufactured drama of interactions with the WH.
Face was good. Perfect in that it generated no issues to clean up, but other networks picked up clips re Iran.
Gates's remark that he couldn't send any new troops before January to Afghanistan seems to be the only thing
approaching news.
I saw WJC on Meet (VERY good, and a lot about CGI's work re women and girls), but I missed Paterson!"
3555,"Nice feed back on Capricia's Diplomatic Women's Corp lunch with 160 women from around government (WH, agencies,
Hill) and women ambassadors from other countries."
3556,"Sorry -- meant to send earlier:
China sees no chance of climate deal - source
Thu Dec 17, 2009
Print I Single Page
By Krittivas Mukherjee and Pete Harrison
COPENHAGEN (Reuters) - China has told participants in the U.N. climate change talks that it sees no possibility of
achieving an operational accord this week, an official involved in the Copenhagen talks said on Thursday.
Dozens of heads of state are descending on the Danish capital to address the December 7-18 conference, and had hoped
to sign on Friday a new pact to tackle global warming.
The official, who asked not to be identified, told Reuters the Chinese had instead suggested issuing ""a short political
declaration of some sort,"" but it was not clear what that would say.
The official said negotiations were continuing to try to reach a breakthrough that would still allow an operational
agreement to be signed. The official said the sticking point for China appeared to be a process issue.
